---
title: "10_1016j_apsusc_2015_03.170"
---


Applied  Surface  Science  345  (2015)  249–255 


Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect 


Applied 


Surface 


Science 


j o u  r n  a l  h  o m  e p  a g e :  w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / a p s u s c 


The   pH-dependant   attachment   of   ceria   nanoparticles   to   silica   using surface   analytical   techniques 


K.   Dawkins,   B.W.   Rudyk,   Z.   Xu,   K.   Cadien ∗ 


Department  of  Chemical  and  Materials  Engineering,  University  of  Alberta,  ECERF  7-034,  9107  –  116  Street,  Edmonton,  Alberta,  Canada  T6G  2V4 


a 


r 


t 


i 


c 


l 


e 


i 


n 


f 


o 


a 


b 


s 


t 


r 


a 


c 


t 


Article  history: Received  21  January  2015 Received  in  revised  form  25  March  2015 Accepted  26  March  2015 Available  online  3  April  2015 


Keywords: Adhesion Si Ce X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy Chemical  mechanical  polishing 


The   adhesion   and   removal   of   ceria   particles   to   a  silica   surface   was   investigated   with   the   use   of   X-ray photoelectron   spectroscopy   (XPS),   scanning   electron   microscopy   (SEM)   and  auger   electron   spectroscopy (AES)   measurements.   A   model   is   presented   based   on   electrophoretic   mobility   measurements   of  ceria slurry  and  silica   particles   at   different   pH’s.   XPS   results   show   that   at   acidic   pH  values,   ceria   is  present   on silica  surfaces,   but   at   alkaline   pH  values,   far   less   ceria   is   present,   or   no   ceria   is   present   in   the   extreme   case. SEM   results   corroborated   the  XPS   results   showing   uniform   distribution   of  ceria   particles   on  silica   surface at   pH   6  while   a  clean   silica   surface   is   observed   at   pH   12.  However,   SEM   images   show   agglomeration   of ∼pH   9.6.  High   resolution   Ce   3d   XPS   analysis ceria   particles   occurring   at   the   isoelectric   point   of   ceria   at ∼69%   Ce(IV).   AES   mapping   done indicates   that   ceria   present   on  the   surface   is   composed at   speciﬁc   points   on  the   silica   surface   validated   both   XPS   and  SEM   results.   Based   on   XPS,   SEM   and  AES analyses,   it   is  clear   that   an   alkaline   pH   is   necessary   to   minimize   particulate   contamination   of   silica   surface by   ceria. 


∼31%   Ce(III)   and 


© 


2015   Elsevier   B.V.   All   rights   reserved. 


## 1.  Introduction

Over  the  past  decade,  ceria  particles  have  attracted  signiﬁcant attention  due  to  their  physical  and  chemical  properties  which have  proven  to  be  very  useful  especially  in  integrated  circuit  fab- rication  technology  such  as  chemical  mechanical  polishing  (CMP) 
[3–7].  Cerium  oxide  is  ambiguous,  containing  multiple  valences
of  which  the  most  commonly  used  are:  cerium  (III)  oxide,  Ce2O3 or  cerium  (IV)  oxide,  CeO2.  However,  the  most  prevalent  form  in which  cerium  oxide  exists  is  CeO2 [1],  which  enhances  chemical action  on  oxide  surfaces.  For  the  remainder  of  this  paper  we   will use  cerium  oxide  and  ceria,  interchangeably,  to  refer  to  CeO2. 


CeO2 possesses  a  ﬂuorite  structure  with  a  lattice  constant  of 0.541  nm  [1].  The  earliest  use  of  cerium  oxide  was  as  a  hydro- carbon  catalyst  during  the  high  temperature  cleaning  process  of self-cleaning  ovens  [2].  Cerium  oxide  based  slurries  have  been  used for  decades  in  glass  and  optical  lens  polishing  [3,4].  Recently,  ceria based  slurries  have  emerged  as  important  abrasives  in  CMP   appli- cations  such  as  shallow  trench  isolation  (STI),  liquid  crystal  display (LCD)  and  interlayer  dielectrics  (ILD)  applications  [3–7].  STI  is  an isolation  technique  used  for  semiconductor  devices  with  small  line widths  and  high  transistor  density  [5].  STI  embeds  ﬁeld  oxide  into 


∗ 


Corresponding  author.  Tel.:  +1  780  492  7380;  fax:  +1  780  492  2881. E-mail  address:  kcadien@ualberta.ca  (K.  Cadien). 


http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.03.170 0169-4332/©  2015  Elsevier  B.V.  All  rights  reserved. 


silicon  and  establishes  an  abrupt,  near  vertical  interface  between the  oxide  and  active-area  regions  hence  preventing  “bird’s  peak” which  results  from  the  lateral  encroachment  of  oxide  into  the  active area  of  the  substrate  below  the  nitride  mask  which  is  used  in the  local  oxidation  of  silicon  (“LOCOS”)  process  [5].  The  STI  pro- cess  starts  with  growing  pad  oxide  on  a  silicon  wafer,  followed by  deposition  of  a  nitride  layer,  lithography  and  patterning,  and then  a  shallow  trench  is  etched  into  the  silicon  substrate  using  the patterned  nitride  layer  as  a  mask.  This  is  followed  by  liner  oxida- tion,  and  CVD  oxide  gap  ﬁll  [5].  The  last  steps  include  oxide  CMP to  remove  the  overburden  silicon  dioxide  (stopping  on  the  nitride) followed  by  nitride  strip  [5].  Ceria  abrasives  are  used  widely  in  STI CMP   slurries  due  to  their  high  selectivity  [4–7],  that  is,  the  oxide removal  rate  is  high  while  the  nitride  removal  is  low.  Ceria  particles have  the  ability  to  absorb  silicate  ions  in  the  removal  of  silica  dur- ing  the  CMP   process.  Ceria  based  slurries  have  higher  polish  rates than  silica  based  slurries  and,  at  the  same  time,  improved  surface ﬁnish  [4,7].  Several  studies  have  been  done  to  investigate  the  mech- anism  of  both  the  high  selectivity  of  ceria  slurries  and  the  CMP   of silica  surfaces  by  ceria  abrasives  [3–11,14]  yet  no  exact  polishing mechanism  is  known  for  CeO2.  Most  of  these  studies  were  based  on the  adhesion/interaction  of  the  ceria  abrasive  with  the  silica  sub- strate.  The  “chemical  tooth”  model  was   proposed  by  Cook  [8]  for glass  polishing,  which  is  said  to  be  responsible  for  the  high  oxide removal.  In  this  model,  a  temporary  chemical  bond  initially  exists between  the  ceria  abrasives  and  the  silica  substrate  which  is  said 


The  experimental  analysis  of  the  effect  of  pH  on  ceria–silica  inter- action  for  the  subsequent  removal  of  ceria  abrasives  from  silica surfaces  will  be  useful  to  obtain  clean  silica  surfaces  and  to  design slurries  that  limit  contact  between  abrasive  and  substrate  during the  CMP   process.  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  there  are  no  other studies  which  employ  these  surface  characterization  techniques to  understand  the  mechanism  of  residual  CeO2 contamination  and removal. 


## 2.  Experimental  procedures

## 2.1.  Ceria  slurry  preparation

1 


× 


The  ceria  slurry  used  in  this  study,  namely  CeO2,  from  Nyacol Nano  Technologies,  had  a  20  wt%  ceria  concentration.  De-ionized water  (Milli-Q  UV  PLUS),  referred  to  as  Milli-Q  water,  was used  for  slurry  dilution  to  5  wt%  concentration.  The  pH  of  solu- tions/suspensions  was   measured  by  an  Accumet  Basic  AB15  pH metre,  which  was  calibrated  each  time  prior  to  use.  Citric  acid  and potassium  hydroxide  were  used  to  adjust  the  pH  of  suspensions.  A silicon  oxide  wafer  which  was   cleaved  into  three  1  cm cm  pieces was  used  as  the  substrate  for  this  experiment.  The  substrate  was dipped  into  the  ceria  suspension  for  1  min   at  a  stirring  speed  of 286  revolutions/min.  It  was  then  rinsed  in  Milli-Q  water  for  1  min at  a  ﬂow  rate  of  250  mL/min  and  dried  in  air. 


In  order  to  measure  the  surface  charge  of  the  particles  in  the slurry  and  on  the  wafer  surface,  the  zeta  potentials  of  ceria  and  sil- icon  dioxide  particles  were  measured  over  a  wide  pH  range  (3–12) using  a  Nano  ZS  Zetasizer  from  Malvern  Inc.  The  suspensions  used were  prepared  by  a  dilution  of  the  original  slurries  to  approxi- mately  1  wt%   for  ceria  and  0.5  wt%  for  silica  using  Milli-Q  water. The  pH  of  the  suspensions  was  adjusted  using  citric  acid  and  potas- sium  hydroxide.  The  zeta  potential  measurement  recorded  was  an average  of  three  consecutive  measurements  for  each  sample.  The refractive  indices  used  were  1.457,  1.33  and  2.1  for  silica,  water  and ceria,  respectively,  while  the  absorptivity  was  set  at  0.01  for  silica and  0.05  ceria.  All  measurements  were  done  at  room  temperature (25 ◦C).  The  viscosity  was   set  at  8.872 


10−4 Pa  s. 


× 


± 


Particle  size  and  size  distribution  of  the  ceria  slurry  was  found using  a  Malvern  Nano  ZS  Zetasizer,  which  was   previously  used  for the  zeta  potential  measurements.  The  ceria  suspension  used  was prepared  by  dilution  of  the  original  slurry  to  0.5  wt%  using  Milli-Q water  and  the  pH  was   adjusted  to  approximately  4 0.03.  A  small disposable  cuvette  was  used  to  hold  the  suspension.  All  measure- ments  were  done  at  room  temperature,  25 ◦C.  The  refractive  index was  set  at  2.1  and  1.33  for  ceria  and  water,  respectively.  Again, the  ﬁnal  measurement  recorded  was  an  average  of  three  consec- utive  measurements.  The  average  particle  size  was   determined  to ∼5  nm  at  pH  4  (Fig.  S1  in  supplementary  information),  and  is be consistent  with  the  particle  size  given  by  the  slurry  supplier.  At  pH 4,  the  particles  were  mono-dispersed  and  therefore  show  little  or no  agglomeration. 


Supplementary  Fig.  S1  related  to  this  article  can  be  found,  in  the online  version,  at  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.03.170. 


## 2.3.  Particle  size  distribution

## 2.4.  XPS  measurements

All  XPS  measurements  (except  pH  12  survey  spectrum  – discussed  below)  were  completed  using  a  Kratos  Axis  Ultra  spec- trometer  equipped  with  a  monochromatic  Al  K(cid:2) (hv  =  1486.7  eV) 


## 2.2.  Zeta  potential  measurements

to  be  responsible  for  the  removal  of  the  silica  during  the  polishing process,  as  shown  in  Eq.  (1)  below: 


(1) 


OH− 


+ 


Si  O− ↔ 


Si  O  Ce 


+ 


Ce  OH 


However,  Cook’s  explanation 


the  removal  of  silica 
[9],



is  only  a  theoretical  expla- nation  of in the  CMP   process.  Fur- thermore,  Osseo-Asare  et  al. in  their  study,  concluded that  the  adsorption  phenomenon  is  responsible  for  the  mate- rial  removal  mechanism.  To  explain  the  nature  of  ceria/silica interaction,  Abiade  et  al.  [4]  examined  the  effect  of  ceria  slurry pH  on  silica  removal.  Using  atomic  force  microscopy  (AFM), X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  (XPS)  and  scanning  electron microscopy  (SEM)  to  examine  particle–surface  interaction,  they showed  that  the  removal  of  silica  is  strongly  dependent  on  the  pH of  the  ceria  slurry  with  the  maximum  removal  occurring  near  the isoelectric  point  of  the  slurry. 


Despite  the  many  advantages  of  using  ceria  slurry,  it  is  difﬁcult to  remove  ceria  particles  from  silica  surfaces  during  CMP   clean- ing  steps.  CeO2 removal  from  the  SiO2 surface  is  critical  because remaining  particles  cause  defects  [10],  and  the  STI  process  occurs  at very  sensitive  location  in  the  process,  that  is,  at  the  transistor  level. a In  the  CMP   process,  micro-scratches  are  one  of  the  main  problems in  the  planarization  of  SiO2 surfaces  that  is  caused  by  contaminants or  the  use  of  crushed  abrasives.  However,  the  nature  of  this  scratch formation  is  not  fully  understood.  Volkov  et  al.  [11],  in  their  study of  the  adhesion  of  ceria  abrasive  on  silica  surfaces  during  the  CMP process,  showed  a  correlation  between  adhesion  and  the  creation of  scratches,  speciﬁcally  higher  adhesion  correlates  with  a  higher number  of  defects.  They  went  on  to  propose  that  the  agglomeration of  abrasive  particles  also  causes  the  number  of  defects  to  increase. The  interaction  between  CeO2 abrasives  and  SiO2 surface  can  be explained  by  electrostatic  and  van  der  Waals  forces.  In  the  semi- conductor  industry,  defect  minimization  is  a  major  challenge  and also  of  great  interest  especially  in  the  manufacture  of  sub  15  nm devices.  From  the  literature  [10]  it  is  understood  that  defects  are formed  mainly  due  to  the  interaction  between  the  slurry  and  wafer surface  during  the  CMP   process.  Therefore,  defects  can  be  reduced through  a  fundamental  understanding  of  the  slurry  particle–wafer surface  interaction  to  enable  the  removal  of  the  particles.  Zhang et  al.  [12]  suggested  that  the  slurry  composition  can  be  designed  in such  a  way  that  prevents  particles  from  depositing  onto  the  wafer surface  during  the  CMP   process  and  that  a  repulsive  electrostatic force  is  necessary  to  inhibit  particle-wafer  deposition.  This  can  be achieved  by  measuring  the  zeta  potential  between  the  abrasive  and the  ﬁlm  surface  as  function  of  pH.  A  repulsive  electrostatic  force  can be  reached  when  both  abrasive  and  wafer  surfaces  have  the  same sign.  Additives/chelating  agents  can  also  be  used  in  the  slurry  to modify  its  pH/zeta  potential  and  also  will  minimize  particulate  con- tamination  arising  from  particle-wafer  interaction.  Zhang  et  al.  [12] studied  the  effect  of  using  a  common  pH/chelating  agent,  citric  acid, to  control  alumina  particle  deposition  on  tungsten  and  oxide  sur- faces.  They  found  that  the  use  of  citric  acid  can  minimize  alumina contamination  signiﬁcantly  on  both  tungsten  and  oxide  surfaces. It  has  also  been  stated  that  the  pH  of  the  solution  is  critical  to  the adhesion  and  removal  of  particles  from  surfaces  [10].  Furthermore, based  on  a  study  of  Cu  CMP,  it  was  concluded  that  alkaline  slurry  is required  to  control  particulate  contamination.  However,  in  practice changing  the  slurry  pH  can  be  detrimental  to  the  CMP   process. 


XPS  is  an  effective  technique  for  surface  analysis  and  has  been used  extensively  in  many  areas  of  surface  and  materials  analysis due  to  the  exceptional  combination  of  compositional  and  chemical information  that  it  provides.  SEM,  along  with  Auger  emission  spec- troscopy  (AES)  imaging  and  point  analysis,  were  applied  to  obtain information  about  wafer  surface  topography  and  composition  of the  multi-elemental  sample,  at  various  pH  levels  (pH  6,  9,  and  12) chosen  based  on  the  results  of  the  zeta  potential  determination. 


250 


K.  Dawkins  et  al.  /  Applied  Surface  Science  345  (2015)  249–255 


K.  Dawkins  et  al.  /  Applied  Surface  Science  345  (2015)  249–255 


251 


Fig.  1.  Zeta  potential  measurements  of  silica  and  ceria,  from  pH  3  to  13. 


that  is  observed  for  the  silica  substrate  is  due  to  the  deprotonation of  surface  hydroxyls  according  to  the  following  equation: 


(2) 


Si  O− + 


H+ 


↔ 


Si  OH 


In  our  experiments,  three  pH  values  were  selected  for  the  ceria slurry  which  are  6,  9  and  12,  representative  of  attractive,  neutral and  repulsive  pHs.  These  pHs  were  chosen  because  at  acidic  pH values,  the  ceria–silica  interactions  should  be  completely  attractive while  in  very  basic  media,  a  predominantly  repulsive  interaction  is expected  since  both  surfaces  are  negatively  charged  according  to the  zeta  potential  measurements.  pH  9  was  selected  as  it  was  found to  be  close  to  the  isoelectric  point  of  ceria  particles.  Therefore,  to minimize  ceria  particulate  contamination  on  the  silica  substrate,  a high  pH  is  required  so  both  surfaces  are  negatively  charged  and  a repulsive  electrostatic  force  exists. 


## 3.2.  XPS  analysis

XPS  is  a  surface  sensitive  technique  (sampling  between  3  and 10  nm  [14]),  therefore,  it  is  ideally  suited  to  quantify  the  ceria remaining  on  the  Si  wafers;  however,  because  the  average  parti- cle  size  (∼5  nm,   as  determined  from  the  particle  size  distribution diagram  shown  in  Fig.  S1)  is  well  below  the  maximum  sampling depth,  XPS  also  provides  an  excellent  means  to  characterize  the ceria  nanoparticles.  Thus,  it  was   important  to  examine  both  survey spectra,  and  high  resolution  Ce  3d  spectra.  The  surface  composition was  determined  for  samples  1–3  (pH  6,  9,  and  12,  respectively). Survey  spectra  obtained  are  shown  in  Fig.  3. 


Analysis  of  the  as-received  surfaces  conﬁrmed  the  presence  of C,  O,  and  Si  (identiﬁed  with  C  1s,  O  1s,  and  Si  2s  core-lines),  as expected,  on  all  samples.  Ce  was  detected  (identiﬁed  with  Ce  3d core-line)  on  silica  samples  that  were  dipped  into  the  ceria  slurry at  pH  6  and  9,  with  the  greater  amount  present  on  the  silica  surface at  pH  6.  A  slight  excess  of  O  was   observed  in  the  pH  6  sample,  this  is primarily  attributed  to  surface  hydration  and  oxidation  as  a  result of  exposure  to  atmosphere.  Ce  was  not  detected  in  the  pH  12  sample (Fig.  3(c)). 


The  effect  of  slurry  pH  on  the  %  Ce  surface  concentration  is shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  composition  of  the  Ce  found  on  the  surface was  at  the  highest  with  2.6%  for  the  pH  6  slurry,  while  only  a  trace of  Ce  was  detected  on  the  pH  9  slurry  sample  (<1%  atomic  concen- tration).  The  adhesion  in  sample  2  is  believed  to  be  weak  since  the ceria  particles  are  not  electrostatically  attached  to  the  silica  surface and  the  ceria  particles  will  agglomerate  on  the  surface.  Unlike  the ceria  particles  in  sample  1  (pH  6),  which  are  electrostatically  bound to  the  Si  surface,  those  in  sample  2  (pH  9)  adhere  in  a  different  way. On  preparation  of  the  pH  9  ceria  slurry,  rapid  settling  was   observed. 


To  determine  the  surface  composition  of  the  different  wafers after  slurry  treatment,  survey  spectra  for  all  three  samples  (pH  6, 9,  and  12)  were  collected  with  the  following  parameters:  for  pH  6, and  9:  binding  energy  (BE)  range  =  0–1100  eV,  pass  energy  =  80  eV, step  size  =  0.4  eV,  and  dwell  time  =  0.1  s.  For  pH  12,  a  Mg   K(cid:2) source (1253.7  eV  operated  at  120  W)   was  used  with  the  following  param- eters:  BE  range  =  0–1100  eV,  pass  energy  =  80  eV,  step  size  =  0.4  eV, and  dwell  time  =  0.1  s.  To  better  understand  the  chemical  compo- sition  of  Ce  on  the  surface,  high  resolution  Ce  3d  spectra  were  also collected,  where  applicable,  based  on  the  survey  spectra,  with  the following  parameters:  BE  range  =  877–921  eV,  pass  energy  =  20  eV, step  size  =  0.12  eV,  and  dwell  time  =  0.2  s.  The  collected  spectra were  analyzed  using  the  CasaXPS  software  package  [13].  All  spec- tra  were  calibrated  to  the  C  1s  core-line  at  284.8  eV  arising  from the  C  C/C  H  bonds  in  adventitious  carbon.  Core-lines  were  ﬁtted to  a  pseudo-Voight  lineshape  (70%  Gaussian,  30%  Lorentzian)  to account  for  peak  broadening  after  the  background  was   removed using  a  Shirley  function.  The  precision  of  the  binding  energies  is ±0.1  eV  and  the  precision  of  the  compositional  analy- estimated  at sis  is  estimated  at 


±0.1%. 


## 2.5.  SEM  and  AES  measurements

To  investigate  the  particle–wafer  interaction  and  the  extent  of particle  contamination,  SEM  and  Auger  electron  spectroscopy  was used  to  image  the  surfaces  and  perform  chemical  analysis  using  a JAMP-9500F  Auger  microprobe  (JEOL)  at  the  Alberta  Centre  for  Sur- face  Engineering  and  Science,  University  of  Alberta.  A  Schottky  ﬁeld emitter  was  used  to  produce  electron  probe  diameter  of  approxi- mately  3–8  nm  at  the  sample  surface.  The  SEM  and  Auger  imaging were  done  with  an  accelerating  voltage  and  emission  current  of 15  kV  and  8  nA,  respectively.  The  sample  was  rotated  at  30◦ to  face the  electron  energy  analyzer.  Auger  spectroscopy  and  imaging  was carried  out  with  a  M5   lens  with  0.6%  energy  resolution. 


## 3.  Results  and  discussion

## 3.1.  Zeta  potential  measurements

Coulombic  interactions  are  the  cause  for  adhesion  of  particles  to many  surfaces  which,  in  general,  results  in  particle  contamination on  wafer  surfaces.  Based  on  these  coulombic  interactions,  same  sur- face  charges  repel  while  opposite  charges  attract.  As  a  result  of  this phenomenon,  zeta  potential  measurements  of  ceria  particles  and silica  surfaces  were  used  to  study  these  electrostatic  interactions. In  order  to  investigate  the  surface  charge  of  ceria  particles  in  the slurry  and  the  charge  of  the  silica  surface,  the  zeta  potential  of  ceria and  silica  particles  were  measured  over  a  wide  pH  range  (3–13) as  shown  in  Fig.  1.  From  the  ﬁgure,  it  can  be  observed  that  silica has  a  negative  zeta  potential  over  the  entire  pH  range  studied.  On the  other  hand,  ceria  has  an  isoelectric  point  at  approximately  pH 
## 9.6;  the  ceria  zeta  potential  is  positive  for  pH  <  9.6  and  negative  for
pH  >  9.6.  Therefore,  positively  charged  ceria  particles  are  expected to  be  attracted  to  negatively  charged  silicon  dioxide  surface  over the  pH  range  of  1–9.6  due  to  electrostatic  attraction  as  illustrated in  Fig.  2(a).  In  contrast,  for  pH  >  9.6  ceria  is  negatively  charged  and  is expected  to  be  repelled  by  similarly  charged  silica  surface  as  repre- sented  in  Fig.  2(b).  Abiade  et  al.  [4]  reported  that  the  negative  charge 


× 


radiation  source.  The  spectrometer  was  operated  at  144  W  with  a (cid:3)m.   The  sample  wafers hybrid  lens  and  a  spot  size  of  700 were  secured  to  the  sample  bar  with  copper  strips  and  transferred ∼10−9 Torr.  Sam- to  the  analysis  chamber,  which  was  maintained  at ples  were  not  sputter-cleaned,  and  charge  neutralization  was   not required. 


(cid:3)m 


400 


252 


K.  Dawkins  et  al.  /  Applied  Surface  Science  345  (2015)  249–255 


Fig.  2.  Schematic  representation  of  (a)  electrostatic  attraction  between  positively  charged  ceria  particle  and  negatively  charged  silica  surface  and  (b)  repulsive  force  between negatively  charged  ceria  particle  and  silica  surface. 


This  is  generally  attributed  to  the  formation  of  agglomerates  of unstable  CeO2 nanoparticles,  which  are  held  together  by  relatively weak  electrostatic  interactions  [5,15].  The  few  ceria  nanoparticles that  remain  on  the  surface  are  probably  remnants  dislodged  from agglomerates  after  the  wafer  was  rinsed  with  DI  water.  Another possible  reason  for  this  is  that  ceria  and  silica  may   have  formed  a Ce  O  Si  bond  at  pH  9,  but  this  could  not  be  conﬁrmed  from  the XPS  data.  The  absence  of  cerium  on  the  pH  12  slurry  sample  val- idated  our  theory  of  electrostatic  repulsion  between  same  charge surfaces. 


High  resolution  Ce  3d  spectra  (Fig.  5)  show  signiﬁcant  ﬁne  struc- ture,  induced  by  a  multitude  of  shakedown  satellite  features,  and are  difﬁcult  to  interpret.  The  complexity  of  Ce  3d  spectra  is  well documented  [16–26],  and  the  overall  lineshape  shown  in  Fig.  5  is consistent  with  systems  of  mixed  Ce  valence  [17].  The  envelope comprises  ten  different  peaks  that  can  be  further  categorized  into ﬁve  spin–orbit  split,  3d5/2 and  3d3/2,  core–hole  pairs.  In  keeping 


with  the  most  common  labelling  scheme,  we   denote  all  spin-up (j  =  5/2)  ﬁnal  states  as  v,  and  all  spin-down  (j  =  3/2)  as  u  [16].  The pairs,  v/u,  v(cid:6)(cid:6)/u(cid:6)(cid:6),  and  v(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)/u(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6),  are  attributed  to  the  various  Ce(IV)  ﬁnal states  (Ce  3d94f2 O  2p4,  Ce  3d94f1 O  2p5,  and  Ce  3d94f0 O  2p6, respectively),  while  v0/u0,  and  v(cid:6)/u(cid:6),  are  associated  with  Ce(III)  ﬁnal states,  Ce  3d94f2 O  2p5 and  Ce  3d94f1 O  2p6 [16,17].  Because  of  the incredible  complexity  in  a  Ce  3d  spectrum,  the  presence  of  the  u(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) peak  is  often  considered  a  ﬁngerprint  for  the  existence  of  Ce(IV) 
[17,23].  The  spin-orbit  splitting  is  approximately  18.3  eV  which  is
consistent  with  literature  values  [17,23].  The  peak  positions  and compositional  data  are  tabulated  in  Table  1. 


By  adding  the  component  peaks,  in  accordance  with  the  lit- erature  [24,25],  associated  with  both  Ce(III)  (v0 +  u0 +  v(cid:6) +  u(cid:6))  and Ce(IV)  (v  +  v(cid:6)(cid:6) +  v(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) +  u  +  u(cid:6)(cid:6) +  u(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)),  the  Ce(III)/Ce(IV)  composition  was determined  to  be  30.8%/69.3%.  It  is  clear  from  the  Ce  3d  spec- trum  collected  at  pH  6  that  the  Ce  remaining  on  the  surface  is mostly  Ce(IV).  The  Ce  3d  spectrum  stacked  above  the  deconvoluted 


Fig.  3.  XPS  survey  spectra  of  samples  prepared  in  (a)  pH  6,  (b)  pH  9,  and  (c)  pH  12  slurries.  The  most  intense  core-lines  (Ce  4f,  O  1s,  C  1s,  and  Si  2p)  are  labelled  for  each element   present.  Ce  was  not  observed  in  (c). 


Table   1 XPS  results  for  high-resolution  Ce  3d  core-line. 


Ce  3d5/2,3/2 label 


v0 u0 


v u 


v(cid:6) u(cid:6) 


v(cid:6)(cid:6) u(cid:6)(cid:6) 


v(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) u(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) 


Source 


Ce(III) 


Ce(IV) 


Ce(III) 


Ce(IV) 


Ce(IV) 


K.  Dawkins  et  al.  /  Applied  Surface  Science  345  (2015)  249–255 


253 


Final  state  electronic  conﬁguration 


Position  (eV) 


Atomic  conc.  (%) 


Ce  3d94f2 O  2p5 


Ce  3d94f2 O  2p4 


Ce  3d94f1 O  2p6 


Ce  3d94f1 O  2p5 


Ce  3d94f0 O  2p6 


880.4 899.1 


882.4 900.9 


885.0 903.2 


889.0 907.3 


898.3 916.7 


## 3.0

## 1.4

16.5 
## 9.4



18.5 
## 7.9



10.4 
## 5.3



17.3 10.4 


remaining  on  the  surface  resulted  in  a  poorer  signal  to  noise ratio  which  precluded  any  signiﬁcant  quantiﬁcation.  Interactions between  silicon-based  substrates  and  deposited  thin  ﬁlms  are  doc- umented  and  varied.  Some  cases  (e.g.  TiO2 on  SiO2 [27])  report temperature-dependent  Si  diffusion  from  the  substrate  into  the target  ﬁlm,  while  other  cases  suggest  interfacial  reaction  as  in the  formation  of  cerium  silicate  species  in  heat  treated  CeO2/Si ﬁlms  [24,26].  The  amount  of  Ce(III)  present  in  this  work  (∼31%) is  consistent  with  that  reported  in  the  previously  mentioned  thin- ﬁlm  studies  [24,26]  where  it  is  largely  attributed  to  the  reduction of  CeO2 to  Ce2Si2O7 and  various  cerium  sub-oxides  (Ce2O3,  and Ce7O12).  The  extent  to  which  the  silicate  formation  applies  to  the non-heated  nanoparticles  presented  here  is  unclear.  The  use  of nanoparticles  will  decrease  the  overall  interfacial  surface  area  as compared  to  a  thin  ﬁlm,  but  it  will  increase  the  surface  area  avail- able  for  surface  hydration  and  sub-oxide  formation.  It  is  likely  that the  true  picture  is  a  mixture  of  both  scenarios. 


Fig.  4.  %  Ce  remaining  on  the  silica  surface  after  exposure  to  different  pH  ceria slurries. 


## 3.3.  SEM  and  AES  analysis

spectrum  in  Fig.  5  resulted  from  the  sample  treated  with  the  pH  9 slurry.  All  features  discussed  previously  with  the  pH  6  sample  per- sist  in  the  pH  9  sample,  as  highlighted  by  the  vertical  dashed  lines, however  the  signiﬁcantly  decreased  concentration  of  particles 


Fig.  5.  High  resolution  Ce  3d  XPS  spectra  for  samples  treated  at  pH  6  and  9.  pH 6   (baseline)  component  peaks  are  labelled  as  v/u  (spin-up/spin-down)  core–hole pairs.  The  vertical  dashed  lines  mark  the  peak  positions  for  comparison  with  the  pH 9   sample  (raised). 


Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  of  the  sample  surfaces (Fig.  6)  clearly  showed  the  presence  of  a  number  of  particles  on the  silica  surface  at  pH  6,  a  fewer  number  at  pH  9,  and  no  parti- cles  at  pH  12,  in  agreement  with  the  XPS  data  and  the  electrostatic model.  Ceria  is  an  insulator  and  appears  as  small  white  dots  due to  charging.  Fig.  6(a)  shows  uniform  ceria  particle  distribution  on the  silica  surface  conﬁrms  particle  contamination  when  both  sur- faces  are  oppositely  charged.  Since  the  ceria  particles  have  the  same charge,  they  tend  to  distribute  uniformly  when  they  electrostat- ically  attach  to  silica.  However,  at  pH  9,  a  non-uniform  particle distribution  on  the  substrate  is  observed  as  shown  in  Fig.  6(b).  It was  also  observed  that  the  number  of  ceria  particles  that  can  be seen  on  the  substrate  is  signiﬁcantly  less  than  at  pH  6  and  the  ceria particles  appear  agglomerated  in  contrast  to  the  particles  at  pH  6 which  tend  to  be  more  individual.  This  is  in  agreement  with  pre- vious  studies,  which  showed  that  over  a  pH  range  of  7–10.5,  ceria particles  tend  to  agglomerate  quickly  due  to  particle–particle  bond- ing  of  unstable  ceria  particles  [15].  The  SEM  of  the  pH  12  sample, shown  in  Fig.  6(c),  serves  as  a  visual  conﬁrmation  of  the  absence  of ceria  particles  noted  from  the  XPS  data. 


Auger  electron  spectroscopy  mapping  was  done  on  both  the  pH 6 and  pH  9  samples  to  conﬁrm  the  presence  of  ceria.  Two  different points  were  measured  per  sample;  the  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  7. The  images,  Fig.  7(a)  and  (d),  for  pH  6  and  9  respectively,  show similar  results  to  the  previously  discussed  SEM  images  in  Fig.  6. The  particles  deposited  on  the  wafer  at  pH  6  are  generally  much smaller  (largely  invisible  due  to  the  much  larger  scale  bar  when compared  to  the  SEM),  with  less  overall  agglomeration  than  with the  pH  9  sample.  The  Auger  spectra  (shown  in  Fig.  7(b),  (c),  (e),  and (f)  as  the  signal  derivative)  all  show  the  presence  of  Ce,  O,  and  Si,  in 


254 


K.  Dawkins  et  al.  /  Applied  Surface  Science  345  (2015)  249–255 


Fig.  6.  SEM  images  of  the  adhesion  of  ceria  particles  to  silica  surfaces  when  ceria  slurry  was  used  at  (a)  pH  6  (b)  pH  9,  and  (c)  pH  12. 


Fig.  7.  Images  of  (a)  pH  6  sample,  and  (d)  pH  9  sample  accompanied  by  AES  point  analysis  at  (b)  pH  6  –  point  1,  (c)  pH  6  –  point  2,  (e)  pH  9  –  point  1,  and  (f)  pH  9  –  point  2. 


agreement  with  the  XPS  results.  Carbon  was  detected  in  both  points of  the  pH  9  sample  but  not  in  the  pH  6  sample  (carbon  was   detected in  all  XPS  survey  spectra).  This  discrepancy  is  likely  the  result  of  a slightly  longer  exposure  to  atmosphere  for  the  pH  9  sample  result- ing  in  a  buildup  of  dust  and  adventitious  carbon.  We   consider  the points  measured  to  be  representative  of  sample  surfaces. 


## 4.  Conclusions

The  removal  of  ceria  abrasives  from  silica  surfaces  has  been  eval- uated  using  XPS,  SEM,  and  AES.  The  zeta  potential  of  ceria  exhibited a positive  surface  charge  in  the  pH  range  of  3–9.6  with  an  IEP  at approximately  pH  9.6  and  a  negative  surface  charge  for  pH  >  9.6 while  silica  maintained  a  negative  surface  charge  in  the  pH  range  of 3–13.  Based  on  the  zeta  potential  measurements,  it  was   suggested that  a  high  pH  (>9)  is  required  to  prevent  ceria  particles  from  inter- acting  with  silica  surface  due  to  electrostatic  repulsion.  This  was explained  using  coulombic  interactions  and  was  conﬁrmed  by  the experimental  ﬁndings  (XPS,  SEM  and  AES).  Of  the  tested  samples, 


the  adhesion  of  ceria  particles  to  the  silica  substrate  was   greatest at  pH  6  and  decreased  through  pH  9,  where  only  limited  adhesion was  observed,  to  pH  12,  for  which  the  silica  wafer  was  devoid  of ceria.  Ceria  present  on  the  surface  at  pH  6  was   shown,  through  high- ∼31%:69%  ratio resolution  Ce  3d  XPS  analysis,  to  be  composed  of  a of  Ce(III):Ce(IV).  The  pH  9  sample  showed  similar  lineshape,  and, likely,  a  similar  Ce(III):Ce(IV)  ratio,  however  the  decrease  magni- tude  prevented  any  meaningful  quantitative  analysis.  Based  on  XPS, SEM  and  AES  analyses,  it  is  clear  that  an  interaction  exists  between the  ceria  and  silica  surfaces,  however,  the  nature  of  this  interaction was  not  studied  in  detail  and  will  be  investigated  in  subsequent work. 


In  addition,  it  is  suggested  that  for  the  cleaning  process  in  CMP, pH  modiﬁcation  can  be  used  of  the  slurry  may   be  a  useful  strategy to  enhance  cleaning  of  the  wafer.  This  work  has  demonstrated  that the  optimum  pH  for  obtaining  a  clean  silica  surface,  after  exposure to  a  ceria  slurry,  is  pH  >  9.6,  and  we   know  from  previous  work  that the  preferred  pH  for  the  polishing  of  silica  substrates  with  ceria is  approximately  pH  4  [5].  To  rectify  this,  one  possible  approach 


K.  Dawkins  et  al.  /  Applied  Surface  Science  345  (2015)  249–255 


255 


would  be  to  polish  wafers  with  optimum  removal  pH,  and  conclude the  last  few  seconds  of  the  polish  process  with  a  high  pH  slurry  by adding  potassium  hydroxide,  for  example,  to  the  polishing  slurry on  the  pad.  Emphasis  should  be  placed  on  designing  slurries  that limit  contact  between  the  abrasive  and  the  substrate,  at  least  in  the ﬁnal  stage  of  the  polish  process. 


Acknowledgements 


The  authors  would  like  to  thank  the  Natural  Sciences  and  Engi- neering  Research  Council  of  Canada  for  funding  this  work,  and Dr.  Lucy  Nolan  for  many  insightful  discussions.  SEM  images,  XPS and  Auger  spectra  were  collected  at  the  Alberta  Centre  for  Surface Engineering  and  Science  (ACSES)  which  was  established  with  sup- port  from  the  Canadian  Foundation  for  Innovation  (CFI)  and  Alberta Innovation  and  Science. 


# References

[1]  T.  Wiktorczyk,  P.  Bieganski,  E.  Zielony,  Preparation  and  optical  characterization

of  e-beam  deposited  cerium  oxide  ﬁlms,  Opt.  Mater.  34  (2012)  2101–2107. 
[2]  A.  Trovarelli,  in:  G.J.  Hutchings  (Ed.),  Catalysis  by  Ceria  and  Related  Materials,



Imperial  College  Press,  London,  2002. 


[3]  P.  Suphantharida,  K.  Osseo-Asare,  Cerium  oxide  slurries  in  CMP.  Electrophoretic

mobility  and  adsorption  investigations  of  ceria/silicate  interaction,  J.  Elec- trochem.  Soc.  151  (2004)  G658–G662. 


[4]  J.T.  Abiade,  W.   Choi,  R.K.  Singh,  Effect  of  pH  on  ceria–silica  interactions  during

chemical  mechanical  polishing,  J.  Mater.  Res.  20  (2005)  1139–1145. 


[5]  F.  Lin,  L.  Nolan,  Z.  Xu,  K.  Cadien,  A  study  of  the  colloidal  stability  of  mixed  abra-

sive  slurries  and  their  role  in  CMP,  J.  Electrochem.  Soc.  159  (2012)  H482–H489. 
[6]  Y.L.  Hong,  Y.-J.  Kang,  J.-G.  Park,  S.-Y.  Han,  S.-K.  Yun,  B.-U.  Yoon,  C.-K.  Hong,
Adhesion  and  removal  of  silica  and  ceria  particles  on  the  wafer  surfaces  in  STI and   poly  Si  CMP,  Solid  State  Phenom.  134  (2008)  159–163. 


[7]  N.  Chandrasekaran,  Material  removal  mechanisms  of  oxide  and  nitride  CMP

with  ceria  and  silica-based  slurries  –  analysis  of  slurry  particles  pre-  and  post- dielectric  CMP:  advances  in  chemical–mechanical  polishing,  in:  D.S.  Boning, J.W.  Bartha,  A.  Philipossian,  G.  Shinn,  I.  Vos  (Eds.),  Mater.  Res.  Soc.  Symp.  Proc. 816  (2004)  257. 


[10]  J.-G.  Park,  T.-G.  Kim,  Fundamentals  of  post-CMP  cleaning,  Mater.  Res.  Soc.  Proc.

991  (2007)  12. 


[11]  D.O.  Volkov,  P.R.  Veera  Dandu,  H.  Goodman,  B.  Santora,  I.  Sokolov,  Inﬂuence

of   adhesion  of  silica  and  ceria  abrasive  nanoparticles  on  chemical–mechanical planarization  of  silica  surfaces,  Appl.  Surf.  Sci.  257  (2011)  8518–8524. 


[12]  L.M.  Zhang,  S.  Raghavan,  M.   Weling,  Minimization  of  chemical–mechanical  pla-

narization  (CMP)  defects  and  post-CMP  cleaning,  J.  Vac.  Sci.  Technol.  B  17  (1999) 2248–2255. 


[13]  N.  Fairley,  CasaXPS  Version  2.3.9,  Casa  Software  Ltd.,  Teignmouth,  Devon,  UK,

2003. 


[14]  J.C.  Vickerman,  I.S.  Gilmore,  Surface  Analysis  –  The  Principal  Techniques,  2nd

ed.,  John  Wiley  &  Sons  Ltd.,  United  Kingdom,  2009. 


[15]  M.   Nabavi,  O.  Spalla,  B.  Cabane,  Surface  chemistry  of  nanometric  ceria  particles

in   aqueous  dispersions,  J.  Colloid  Interface  Sci.  160  (1993)  459–471. 


[16]  P.  Burroughs,  A.  Hamnett,  A.F.  Orchard,  G.  Thornton,  Satellite  structure  in  X-

ray   photoelectron-spectra  of  some  binary  and  mixed  oxides  of  lanthanum  and cerium,  J.  Chem.  Soc.  Dalton  Trans.  17  (1976)  1686–1698. 


[17]  E.  Beche,  P.  Charvin,  D.  Perarnau,  S.  Abanades,  G.  Flamant,  Ce  3d  XPS  investiga-

tion   of  cerium  oxides  and  mixed  cerium  oxide  (CexTiyOz),  Surf.  Interface  Anal. 40   (2008)  264–267. 


[18]  A.  Kotani,  T.  Jo,  J.C.  Parlebas,  Many-body  effects  in  core-level  spectroscopy  of

rare-earth  compounds,  J.  Adv.  Phys.  37  (1988)  37–85. 


[19]  F.  Larachi,  J.  Pierre,  A.  Adnot,  A.  Bernis,  Ce  3d  XPS  study  of  composite

CexMn1−xO2−y wet   oxidation  catalysts,  Appl.  Surf.  Sci.  195  (2002)  236–250. 
[20]  G.  Praline,  B.E.  Koel,  R.L.  Hance,  H.I.  Lee,  J.M.  White,  X-ray  photoelectron  study
of   the  reaction  of  oxygen  with  cerium,  J.  Electron  Spectrosc.  Relat.  Phenom.  21 (1980)  17–30. 


[21]  E.J.  Preisler,  O.J.  Marsh,  R.A.  Beach,  T.C.  McGill,  Stability  of  cerium  oxide  on

silicon  studied  by  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy,  J.  Vac.  Sci.  Technol.  B  19 (2001)  1611–1618. 


[22]  A.Q.  Wang,  P.  Punchaipetch,  R.M.  Wallace,  T.D.  Golden,  X-ray  photoelectron

spectroscopy  study  of  electrodeposited  nanostructured  CeO2 ﬁlms,  J.  Vac.  Sci. Technol.  B  21  (2003)  1169–1175. 


[23]  F.  Le  Normand,  J.  El  Failah,  L.  Hilaire,  P.I.  Legare,  A.  Kotani,  J.C.  Parlebas,

Photoemission  on  3d  core  levels  of  cerium:  an  experimental  and  theoretical investigation  of  the  reduction  of  cerium  dioxide,  Solid  State  Commun.  71  (1989) 885–889. 


[24]  C.  Anandan,  P.  Bera,  XPS  studies  on  the  interaction  of  CeO2 with  silicon  in  mag-

netron  sputtered  CeO2 thin  ﬁlms  on  Si  and  Si3N4 substrates,  Appl.  Surf.  Sci.  283 (2013)  297–303. 


[25]  Q.  Xu,  W.   lei,  X.  Li,  X.  Qi,  J.  Yu,  G.  Liu,  J.  Wang,  P.  Zhang,  Efﬁcient  removal

of   formaldehyde  by  nanosized  gold  on  well-deﬁned  CeO2 nanorods  at  room temperature,  Environ.  Sci.  Technol.  48  (2014)  9702–9708. 


[26]  L.  Luo,  J.  Chen,  X.  Wang,  Thermal  stability  and  surface  behaviours  of  CeO2/Si

[8]  L.M.  Cook,  Chemical  processes  in  glass  polishing,  J.  Non-Cryst.  Solids  120  (1990)

ﬁlms  during  in-situ  vacuum  annealing,  Appl.  Surf.  Sci.  322  (2014)  111–115. 


152–171. 


[9]  K.  Osseo-Asare,  Surface  chemical  processes  in  chemical  mechanical  polishing  –

relationship  between  silica  material  removal  rate  and  the  point  of  zero  charge of  the  abrasive  material,  J.  Electrochem.  Soc.  149  (2002)  (2002)  G651–G655. 


[27]  J.-G.  Yu,  H.-G.  Yu,  B.  Cheng,  X.-J.  Zhao,  J.C.  Yu,  W.-K.  Ho,  The  effect  of  calcination

temperature  on  the  surface  microstructure  and  photocatalytic  activity  of  TiO2 thin  ﬁlms  prepared  by  liquid  phase  deposition,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  B  107  (2003) 13871–13879. 

