---
title: "10_1016j_mssp_2022.107043"
---


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 


Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 


journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mssp 


Effect of slurry particles on PVA brush contamination during post-CMP cleaning 


Samrina Sahir a, Hwi-Won Cho a, Palwasha Jalalzai a, Suprakash Samanta a, Satomi Hamada b, Tae-Gon Kim c, **, Jin-Goo Park a,* a Department of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Hanyang University, Ansan, 15588, Republic of Korea b EBARA Corporation, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, 251-8502, Japan c Department of Smart Convergence Engineering, Hanyang University, Ansan, 15588, Republic of Korea 


# A R T I C L E  I N F O

# A B S T R A C T

Keywords: Brush scrubbing Post-CMP cleaning Silica abrasive Ceria abrasive Contamination Cross-contamination Brush loading 


PVA (polyvinyl acetal) brush scrubbing is a widely used post-CMP cleaning process due to its low cost and high cleaning efficiency. However, during these processes, the PVA brush gets contaminated with abrasive particles that result in wafer cross-contamination and reduced cleaning efficiency. This study investigated the effects of abrasive types such as silica and ceria, the slurry pH, and the scrubbing process parameters on brush contami- nation. Ceria slurries showed significantly more contamination of brushes compared to silica slurries. The brush contamination increased with a decrease in pH from 7 to 4 due to increased electrostatic attractive forces be- tween the ceria particles and the brush surfaces, although very low brush contamination was observed by the ceria slurries at pH 10 due to a strong electrostatic repulsion. Conversely, very low brush contamination was observed for the silica slurries at all pH values due to the reduced interaction between the particles and the brush surface (electrostatic repulsion). Furthermore, there was no significant effect of gap distance and brush rotation speed on brush contamination. The abrasive concentration and the contamination process time showed a linear relationship as the contamination was significantly increased by increasing the abrasive concentration in slurry and process time. These results indicate that brush contamination is more sensitive to the abrasive nature and concentration, the slurry pH, and the process time than to other parameters. 


## 1. Introduction

Chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) is a key process for pol- ishing wafer surfaces and has become critical for manufacturing semi- conductor  devices  below  10-nm  [1–4].  This  scaling-down  of  devices demands  nano-size  abrasives  with  controlled  formulations  to  achieve the required planarization by CMP. Further, this imposes stringent re- quirements on the post-CMP cleaning process to reduce the defectivity for  yield  enhancement  and  device  reliability.  Therefore,  post-CMP cleaning needs to be performed meticulously to control defectivity. In post-CMP cleaning processes, the polyvinyl acetal (PVA) brushes effec- tively  remove  contaminants,  and  the  physical  forces  responsible  for cleaning  wafer  surfaces  with  PVA  brushes  result  in  a  low  cost  of ownership [5]. 


In  the  PVA  brush  cleaning  process,  the  contact  elastic  forces,  hy- drodynamic drag forces, and frictional forces between the brush and the 


particles are the dominant forces responsible for removing the particles 
[6–9]. Better cleaning performance can be achieved by optimizing the
brush rotation speed, the gap distance between the brush and the wafer, the solution flow rate, and/or the cleaning chemistry [10]. The tribo- logical properties of the brush, such as the dynamic coefficient of friction (COF) as a function of brush gap distance, the contact pressure, and the shear  forces  between  the  PVA  brush  and  the  wafer  are  effective  in reducing the defectivity [11–15]. 


However, the brush itself can be a source of defects. This may be due to either the presence of impurities in the incoming brushes, improper brush break-in methods, or the brush being overused (cleaning too many wafers),  which  might  result  in  excessive  particle  loading.  Sahir  et  al. 
[16] reported on excessive brush loading and its subsequent effect on
cross-contamination. Lee et al. [17] reported on the presence of residual organic  impurities  in  the  incoming  PVA  brushes  generated  from  the brush manufacturing process, and Kim et al. [18] investigated the brush 


* Corresponding author. Hanyang University ERICA Campus, Department of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Ansan, 15588, Republic of Korea. ** Corresponding author. Hanyang University ERICA Campus, Department of Smart Convergence Engineering, Ansan, 15588, Republic of Korea. 


E-mail addresses: tgon@hanyang.ac.kr (T.-G. Kim), jgpark@hanyang.ac.kr (J.-G. Park). 


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mssp.2022.107043 Received 18 April 2022; Received in revised form 8 August 2022; Accepted 8 August 2022 


Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 151 (2022) 107043 


Available online 18 August 2022 1369-8001/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 


S. Sahir et al. 


turbulence  and 


cross-contamination effect in the CMP in-situ cleaning module. A suc- cessful  break-in  method  was  established  by  Lee  et  al.  [19]  whereby scrubbing  the  new  brush  on  numerous  dummy  wafers  reduced  the incoming brush impurities. Further, Lee et al. [20] observed that strong micro shock  waves  generated  during  an ultrasound-assisted cleaning process effectively and rapidly removed the particulate  residue  present  in  the  incoming  PVA  brushes  without damaging the brushes. Recently, Kim et al. [21] reported the effects of various process parameters such as the rotation speed of the wafer and the brush, the gap distance, and the de-ionized water (DIW) flow rate on cross-contamination of the PVA brush during post-CMP cleaning. Cho et al. [22] reported the effect of rotation speed on cleaning efficiency, and  An  et  al.  [23]  reported  that  cross-contamination  was  highly dependent on the zeta potential of the brush, the wafer, and the abra- sives.  Interestingly,  all  of  these  studies  indicated  the  importance  of cross-contamination  and  highlighted  some  root  causes  for  this  effect. However, none of them considered the interaction of abrasives and the brush surface during the post-CMP cleaning process. 


Among  the  abrasives,  silica  is  commonly  used  for  dielectric  and metal CMP, whereas ceria is widely adopted for oxide CMP processes 
[24,25]. The porous structure of PVA brushes allows abrasive entrap-
ment  during  brush  scrubbing,  which  might  lead  to  micro-scratches 


during enhanced downforce or low brush rotation speed during scrub- bing, resulting in reduced brush life [26]. Recently, the interaction of ceria  particles  with  silicon  oxide  surfaces  during  CMP  and  post-CMP cleaning  was  investigated  [27,28],  but  not  many  studies  have addressed  the  contamination  of  PVA  brushes  with  abrasive  particles. Therefore, it is important to understand the interaction between abra- sives and PVA brush surfaces during the brush scrubbing process. This will help to overcome the brush cleaning issues for yield enhancement and defect reduction. 


This study investigated the contamination of PVA brushes by abra- sives during brush scrubbing. Initially, the  contamination by silica or ceria  particles  at  different  pH  levels  was  analyzed  to  understand  the effect of slurry pH on the abrasives and brush interactions. Furthermore, the effect of different process  parameters such as  brush gap distance, brush  rotation  speed,  process  time,  and  abrasive  concentration  on contamination  of  PVA  brushes  during  scrubbing  was  evaluated  by qualitative  and  quantitative  analysis  techniques  —  FE-SEM  and  ICP- OES, respectively. 


## 2. Experimental materials and procedure

PVA brushes (200 mm, BS101-0, AION Co. Ltd., Japan) were used 


Fig. 1. (a) Lab-scale roller brush scrubbing module, and (b) procedural schematics adopted for evaluating the brush contamination at different process parameters. 


Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 151 (2022) 107043 


2 


S. Sahir et al. 


with 4-in. prime bare silicon (Si) wafers as a substrate for investigating the brush loading. Silica (150-nm mean size, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and ceria (100-nm mean size, US Research Nanomaterials Inc., USA) parti- cles were used as abrasives in this study. The chemicals HNO3  (60%, Samchun Chemicals Korea) and KOH (85–87%, Daejung Chemicals & Metals, Korea) were used to adjust the slurry pH. The silica and ceria slurries  used  for  contamination  were  prepared  by  adding  different concentrations of abrasive in DIW and adjusting the pH of slurries by pH adjustors. No other additives were added to both ceria and silica slurries. These slurries were further used for all contamination experiments as well as for zeta potential measurement. 


## 2.1. Brush contamination process

A 22-mm brush was cut out of a 200-mm brush and soaked in DIW for at least 24 h before use to maintain its wet condition. The contamination experiments were carried out by placing the 22-mm brush on a mandrel with a staged Si wafer, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The brush contamination was performed by scrubbing the brush on the Si wafer in the presence of slurry, followed by DIW rinsing, as presented in Fig. 1(b). A lab-scale, roller-type brush scrubber (CSY Co., Korea) was used for the scrubbing experiments [20]. 


The effects of the abrasive type and slurry pH on brush contamina- tion were investigated by preparing 0.01 wt% silica and ceria slurries at pH 4, 7, and 10. The brush contamination was performed by supplying slurries  at  150  mL/min  while  rotating  the  brush  for  1  min  on  the  Si wafer. This contamination process was followed by a 2-min DIW rinsing step to remove loosely attached abrasive particles. The brush and wafer rotation speeds were maintained at 240 and 50 rpm, respectively, with a gap distance of (cid:0) 2 mm. 


Based  on  the  contamination  results,  the  effects  of  the  scrubbing process parameters on brush contamination were evaluated using ceria slurries prepared at pH 4. The effects of different process parameters, such as abrasive concentration (0.005, 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1 wt%), gap distance (0, (cid:0) 1, and (cid:0) 2 mm), brush rotation speed (50, 100, 200, and 300 rpm) and process run time (30 s, 1, 3, and 5 min) were considered on brush  contamination  while  maintaining  the  DIW  rinsing  condition  as described  previously.  The  other  experimental  parameters  adopted  for brush contamination analysis are summarized in Table 1. 


## 2.2. Brush contamination analysis

The evaluation of brush contamination was carried out by analyzing the dried brush nodules qualitatively and quantitatively. The qualitative analysis  was  performed  using  a  field  emission  scanning  electron  mi- croscope  (FE-SEM)  (MIRA3,  TESCAN.,  Czech  Republic).  The  abrasive concentration and brush contamination were estimated quantitatively by  digesting  the  dried  contaminated  brush  nodules  in  a  nitric  acid (HNO3)  and  hydrofluoric  acid  (HF)  mixture,  and  using  inductively coupled  plasma optical  emission spectrometry ICP-OES  (iCAP™  7000 SERIES,  Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  USA).  The  surface  charge  of  the slurries was analyzed with a zeta potential analyzer (ELS-Z2000, Otsuka Electronics, Japan). The brush nodules were ground to a fine powder using sandpaper (4000-μm film sandpaper, 3 M Co., USA). This ground powder was mixed with DIW at different pH values to estimate the brush 


Table 1 Reference conditions for brush scrubber during the scrubbing process. 


No. 


Process Parameter 


Value 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 


Slurry pH Wafer rotation speed (rpm) Slurry/DIW flow rate (mL/min) Slurry concentration (wt.%) Gap distance (mm) Brush rotation speed (rpm) Contamination process time 


4/7/10 50 150 0.005/0.01/0.05/0.1 0, (cid:0) 1, (cid:0) 2 50/100/200/300 30 s,1 min, 3 min, 5 min 


surface charge using the zeta potential analyzer. 


## 3. Results and discussion

## 3.1. Effect of abrasive nature on brush contamination

Brush scrubbing is one of the most common methods in post-CMP cleaning.  However,  the  scope  of  brush  deterioration  by  abrasive contamination during the scrubbing process is still unclear. In this study, the  effects  of  two  commonly  used  abrasives,  silica,  and  ceria,  were considered to evaluate brush contamination. The effects of abrasive type and pH on brush contamination are reported in Fig. 2. FE-SEM images shown in Fig. 2(a) indicate that silica slurry produced relatively higher contamination in the PVA brush at pH 4, reduced contamination at pH 7, and no contamination was observed at pH 10. The ceria slurries showed a significant effect of pH on contamination of the PVA brush compared to silica slurries, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The PVA brushes were heavily contaminated by ceria at pH 4 during scrubbing, but this was reduced at pH 7 and was very low at pH 10. Considering the effect of abrasive type, ceria produced very high brush contamination compared to silica. 


The effects of abrasive type and pH were further confirmed quanti- tatively by using ICP-OES analysis, and the results are reported in Fig. 2 (c). The results confirm the presence of higher ceria concentration on the PVA  brushes  compared  to  silica  under  all  of  the  pH  conditions.  The abrasive contamination showed a trend of increased contamination at acidic  pH that gradually  decreased with  an  increase in  the  pH of  the slurry. 


Fig.  3  provides  a  better  understanding  of  the  pH-dependent contamination and an evaluation of the interaction mechanism based on the surface charges of the silica, the ceria, and the PVA brush. Silica exhibits an isoelectric point (IEP) ~2 [19,29], whereas the IEP for ceria depends on the synthesis process and may vary from 5–11 [11,19,29, 30]. It can be seen from Fig. 3 that the PVA brush and the silica particles exhibit a negative surface charge under all pH conditions. These similar surface  charges  for  the  silica  particles  and  the  PVA  brush  results  in electrostatic repulsion between them, which is the reason for the low contamination  observed  at  pH  4.  The  magnitude  of  the  electrostatic repulsion increased with an increase in the pH due to increased negative surface charges, which resulted in no contamination of the PVA brush with silica particles at pH 7 and 10. 


The interaction between ceria and the PVA brush could be expected to be significantly different from silica, as ceria exhibits a high positive surface charge at acidic pH that changes to ~0 at pH 7 and is highly negative at pH 10. Ceria particles and the PVA brush showed opposite surface charges at pH 4, as shown in Fig. 3, which resulted in a strong electrostatic attraction. These attractive forces between the ceria and the brush  are  the  reason  for  the  very  high  contamination  observed.  The contamination was reduced at pH 7 due to weak electrostatic attraction as compared to pH 4. This pH-dependent phenomenon is schematically presented  in  Fig.  4(a)  and  Fig.  4(b).  Initially,  there  were  no  particles present on the brush which is represented by the left side schematic of Fig. 4(a) and (b). However, the right side of the schematic after arrows indicates  that  in  the  presence  of  a  continuous  supply  of  ceria/silica slurry during scrubbing, the abrasive particles were loaded to the brush (due  to  electrostatic  attraction)  as  shown  in  Fig.  4(a)  and  a  very  few particles were contaminated to the brush (due to electrostatic repulsion between brush and abrasives) as presented in Fig. 4(b). Therefore, for ceria at pH 4 and 7, the abrasives were positively charged and the brush had  a  negative  surface  charge  which  resulted  in  high  brush  contami- nation after scrubbing as indicated by Fig. 4(a). Whereas, ceria at pH 7 and silica at pH 4, 7, and 11, and the brush surfaces at all pH investi- gated,  were  negatively  charged,  generating  an  electrostatic  repulsion force resulting in low contamination, as represented by Fig. 4(b). These results  indicate  that  the  contamination  primarily  depended  on  the abrasives,  which  subsequently  affected  the  interaction  mechanism  by controlling the surface charges. 


Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 151 (2022) 107043 


3 


S. Sahir et al. 


Fig. 2. The effect of pH on brush contamination by 0.01 wt% (a) silica and (b) ceria slurries (FE-SEM images at 10 kX), and corresponding (c) ICP-OES data. 


## 3.2. Evaluation of process parameters for PVA brush contamination

Significant contamination of the PVA brush was observed at pH 4 for both silica and ceria abrasives. Therefore, the effects of abrasives con- centration were investigated using slurries at only pH 4 due to the higher level of contamination observed. 


## 3.2.1. Effect of abrasive concentration

First,  the  brush  contamination  was  evaluated  with  different  con- centrations  of  abrasives,  as  presented  in  Table  1,  Fig.  5,  and  Fig.  6, indicating the effect of ceria and silica concentration on contamination of  the  PVA  brush.  It  can  be  seen  in  Fig.  5(a–d)  that  the  PVA  brush contamination was increased by increasing the ceria concentration from 0.005 to 0.1 wt%. Similarly, increased ceria contamination of the brush was observed in the ICP-OES analysis results, with an increase in the abrasive concentration, as shown in Fig. 5(e). 0.05 wt% concentration of ceria  slurry,  providing  significantly  high  contamination  to  the  brush, was opted as an optimized concentration for further processing. Similar to  the  trend  observed  for  ceria  concentration,  an  increase  in  brush contamination  was  observed  by  increasing  the  silica  concentration  in slurry from 0.005 to 0.1 wt% as presented in Fig. 6(a–e). This increase in brush contamination by increasing abrasive concentration in the slurry was due to the higher availability of abrasive (ceria/silica) particles to 


Fig.  3. Zeta  potentials  of  the  PVA  brush  and  the  ceria  and  silica  particles measured at different pH. 


Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 151 (2022) 107043 


4 


S. Sahir et al. 


Fig.  4. Schematic  representation  of  interaction  mechanism  between  the  PVA  brush  and  abrasive  particles  (ceria  and  silica);  (a)  electrostatic  attraction  and  (b) electrostatic repulsion between oppositely charged abrasive particles and the brush. 


interact with the brush surface while maintaining the same electrostatic forces at pH 4. However, the brush contamination with ceria was more severe as compared to the silica for the same concentration of abrasives at pH 4. Therefore, this study concludes that at pH 4, the high concen- tration of ceria particles and the attractive electrostatic forces present between the brush and the ceria particles resulted in higher contami- nation.  Hence the  effect of  other process parameters  such as  gap dis- tance, rotation speed, and scrubbing time, was investigated further using only 0.05 wt% ceria slurries at pH 4. 


## 3.2.2. Effect of gap distance

The gap distance can directly affect the pressures applied between the brush and the wafer during scrubbing, and shorter gap distances and higher  compression  improve  particle  removal  due  to  increased  drag force [31]. However, the gap distance might also influence the entrap- ment of particles in the brush during contamination or cleaning. This possible effect of gap distance was evaluated by employing different gap distances,  as  shown  in  Table  1.  In  Fig.  7(a-d),  both  the  FE-SEM  and ICP-OES  results  indicate  that  the  contamination  levels  remained  the same, and no significant effect of gap distance on brush contamination was  observed.  These  results  confirm  that  the  physical  forces  applied during  scrubbing  did  not  affect  the  contamination  level  and  that  the electrostatic  interaction  was  mainly  responsible  for  the  PVA  brush contamination with ceria particles. 


## 3.2.3. Effect of brush rotation speed

The effect of brush rotation speed is also an important factor that may play a vital role in PVA brush contamination during scrubbing. The rotation speeds significantly influence the drag/friction forces that are generated during scrubbing, which subsequently influence the particle removal efficiency of the process [31–33]. Therefore, different rotation speeds  were  used  to  study  the  effect  of  brush  rotation  on  brush contamination (Table 1). The rotation speeds can affect the contact of the brush with the wafer as an increase in rotation speed increases the shear forces and torques generated during scrubbing that subsequently affects the particle removal from the wafer surface [32–36]. Initially, there were no particles present on the wafer surface, which reduces the significance of drag force or rotation speeds on brush contamination by 


scrubbing. As shown in Fig. 8, the increase in rotation speed resulted in only insignificant changes in the contamination level of the brush at all rotation speeds resulting in a similar level of ceria contamination to the brush.  Furthermore,  the  DIW  rinsing  followed  by  contamination  can remove the weekly attached particles. However, the presence of a higher concentration  of  abrasives  on  the  brush  after  contamination  at  all rotation  speeds  indicates  a  strong  interaction  between  the  brush  and abrasives  such  as  a  strong  electrostatic  interaction.  Hence,  the  domi- nating  effect  of  electrostatic  interaction  during  the  squeeze-release (stick-slip  [34])  phenomenon  controls  the  brush  contamination  by abrasives, which indicates that the rotation speed is not a major factor to consider regarding brush contamination by abrasives. 


## 3.2.4. Effect of process time

The  brush  scrubbing  time  directly  influences  the  cleaning  perfor- mance, as the longer the processing time, the better the cleaning effi- ciency will be [22]. Therefore, to evaluate the effect of process time, the contamination process was performed as a function of time, as presented in Table 1 and shown in Fig. 9. It can be observed in Fig. 8 that the brush contamination  with  ceria  particles  increased  with  the  increase  in  the scrubbing time. Unlike brush rotation speed and gap distance, the pro- cessing  time  was  directly  related  to  the  contamination.  These  results demonstrate that a longer interaction time between the brush and the abrasive particles resulted in higher contamination with reduced process yield and brush life. Therefore, understanding the brush and abrasive interaction mechanism is important to control the cleaning process. This study  signifies  the  importance  of  an  effective  conditioning  process  to address the high PVA brush contamination by ceria particles for future studies. 


## 4. Conclusion

The interaction between PVA brushes and abrasives during post-CMP cleaning  was  investigated  in  this  study.  Silica  and  ceria,  the  most commonly  used  abrasives  in  CMP  processes,  were  evaluated for  their role  in  PVA  brush  contamination.  An  electrostatic  repulsion  present between silica and the PVA brushes resulted in very low contamination of silica particles under all pH conditions i.e., pH 4, 7, and 10. However, 


Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 151 (2022) 107043 


5 


S. Sahir et al. 


Fig. 5. The effect of ceria concentration on brush contamination after scrub- bing with pH 4 ceria slurry; FE-SEM results for (a) 0.005 wt%, (b) 0.01 wt%, (c) 0.05  wt%,  (d)  0.1  wt%  ceria,  and  (e)  ceria  concentrations  in  the  brush  by ICP-OES. 


the interaction between ceria and the PVA brushes varied based on the slurry pH. At pH 4, the ceria and the brush exhibited an electrostatic attraction that resulted in very high contamination of the brush surface. With  the  increase  in  the  pH,  the  reduction  in  electrostatic  attraction produced reduced contamination at pH 7 and 10. At pH 4, several other scrubbing process parameters were evaluated to better understand the high brush contamination by ceria particles. The gap distance and brush rotation speed showed an insignificant effect on brush contamination, whereas the brush contamination increased significantly with increases in the abrasive concentration and processing time. Very high PVA brush contamination was observed for 0.05 wt% ceria particles at pH 4 at a processing  time  of  5  min.  Therefore,  it  can  be  stated  that  brush contamination strongly depends on the type of interaction between the abrasives and the brushes that need to be controlled for improved pro- cess  efficiencies.  The  interactions  investigated  in  this  study  can  be applied to optimize brush cleaning processes for improved process yields and longer brush life. 


CRediT authorship contribution statement 


Samrina  Sahir:  Writing  –  original  draft,  Visualization,  Methodol- ogy,  Investigation,  Formal  analysis,  Data curation,  Conceptualization. Hwi-Won  Cho:  Investigation,  Formal  analysis.  Palwasha  Jalalzai: Investigation.  Suprakash  Samanta:  Supervision.  Satomi  Hamada: Supervision.  Tae-Gon  Kim:  Supervision.  Jin-Goo  Park:  Writing  – 


Fig. 6. The effect of silica concentration on brush contamination after scrub- bing with pH 4 silica slurry; FE-SEM results for (a) 0.005 wt%, (b) 0.01 wt%, (c) 0.05  wt%,  (d)  0.1  wt%  silica,  and  (e)  silica  concentrations  in  the  brush  by ICP-OES. 


Fig.  7. The  effect  of  gap  distance  on  brush  contamination  with  pH  4  ceria slurry (0.05 wt%); FE-SEM images for (a) 0 mm, (b) (cid:0) 1 mm, (c) (cid:0) 2 mm gap distance, and (d) ceria concentration in the brush by ICP-OES. 


Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 151 (2022) 107043 


6 


S. Sahir et al. 


review & editing, Supervision, Project administration. 


Declaration of competing interest 


The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 


Data availability 


No data was used for the research described in the article. 


# References

[1] K.S. Gokhale, B.M. Moudgil, Particle technology in chemical mechanical

planarization, Kona-Powder and Particle 25 (2007) 88–96, https://doi.org/ 10.14356/kona.2007010. 


[2] R.R. Schaller, Moore’s law: past, present, and future, IEEE Spectrum 34 (1997)

52–59, https://doi.org/10.1109/6.591665. 


[3] D. Roy, Perspective-electrochemical assessment of slurry formulations for chemical

mechanical planarization of metals: trends, benefits and challenges, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 7 (2018) P209–P212, https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0231804jss. 


[4] M. Tsujimura, Enhanced open innovation: CMP innovation to open new paradigm,

ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 8 (2019) P3098–P3105, https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
## 2.0161905jss.



[5] M. Krishnan, J.W. Nalaskowski, L.M. Cook, Chemical mechanical planarization:

slurry chemistry, materials, and mechanisms, Chem. Rev. 110 (2010) 178–204, https://doi.org/10.1021/cr900170z. 


[6] Y. Huang, D. Guo, X. Lu, J. Luo, Mechanisms for nanoparticle removal in brush

scrubber cleaning, Appl. Surf. Sci. 257 (7) (2011) 3055–3062, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.apsusc.2010.10.115. 


[7] W.-T. Tseng, C. Wu, T. McCormack, J.C. Yang, Post cleaning for FEOL CMP with

silica and ceria slurries, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 6 (2017) P718–P722, https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0101710jss. 


[8] K. Mikhaylichenko, High Shear Force Chemical Mechanic Cleaning for CMP Defect

Reduction, Surface Preparation and Cleaning Conference (SPCC 2017), 2017. Austin, Texas, USA. 


[9] G. Zhang, G. Burdick, F. Dai, T. Bibby, S. Beaudoin, Assessment of post-CMP

cleaning mechanisms using statistically-designed experiments, Thin Solid Films 332 (1998) 379–384, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-6090(98)01038-4. 


[10] P.B. Zantye, A. Kumar, A.K. Sikder, Chemical mechanical planarization for

microelectronics applications, Mater. Sci. Eng. R Rep. 45 (2004) 89–220, https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.mser.2004.06.002. 


[11] K. Xu, R. Vos, G. Vereecke, G. Doumen, W. Fyen, P.W. Mertens, M.M. Heyns,

C. Vinckier, J. Fransaer, Particle adhesion and removal mechanisms during brush scrubber cleaning, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 22 (2004) 2844–2852, https://doi.org/ 10.1116/1.1815319. 


[12] J.C. Yang, Nano-Scale Scratch Impact on 7nm Device and its Improvement by

Predictable CMP Process Conditions, SEMICON KOREA, 2017. 


[13] J.C. Yang, H.J. Kim, V. Govindarajulu, D. Koli, J. Mazzotti, Research Activities on

Defect Improvement of CMP Process in 1x Nm Foundry Device, CMPUGM, Korea, 2016. 


[14] T.H. Lee, Post-CMP In-Situ Cleaning Process Challenges for 14/7nm Nodes, 25th

Korea Surface Cleaning User Group Meeting, Korea, 2017. 


[15] G. Chen, Z. Ni, Y. Bai, Q. Lia, Y. Zhao, The role of interactions between abrasive

particles and the substrate surface in chemical-mechanical planarization of Si-face 6H-SiC, Royal Soc. Chem. 7 (2017) 16938–16952, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
# C6RA27508G.



[16] S. Sahir, H.-W. Cho, T.-G. Kim, S. Hamada, N.P. Yerriboina, J.-G. Park, Study on

PVA brush loading and conditioning during shallow trench isolation post-CMP cleaning process, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 11 (2022), 024004, https://doi. org/10.1149/2162-8777/ac5166. 


[17] J.H. Lee, M.K. Poddar, K.-M. Han, H.-Y. Ryu, N.P. Yerriboina, T.-G. Kim, Y. Wada,

S. Hamada, H. Hiyama, J.-G. Park, Comparative evaluation of organic contamination sources from roller and pencil type PVA brushes during the post- CMP cleaning process, Polym. Test. 90 (2020), 106669, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. polymertesting.2020.106669. 


[18] H.J. Kim, Effect of brush treatment and brush contact sequence on cross-

contaminated defects during CMP in-situ cleaning, J. Korean Soc. Tribologists Lubrication Engineers 31 (2015) 239–244, https://doi.org/10.9725/ kstle.2015.31.6.239. 


[19] J.H. Lee, H.-Y. Ryu, J.-K. Hwang, N.P. Yerriboina, T.-G. Kim, S. Hamada, Y. Wada,

H. Hiyama, J.-G. Park, A breakthrough method for the effective conditioning of PVA brush used for post-CMP process, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 8 (6) (2019) P307–P312, https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0111906jss. 


[20] J.H. Lee, M.K. Poddar, N.P. Yerriboina, H.-Y. Ryu, K.-M. Han, T.-G. Kim,

S. Hamada, Y. Wada, H. Hiyama, J.-G. Park, Ultrasound-induced break-in method for an incoming polyvinyl acetal (PVA) brush used during the post-CMP cleaning process, Polym. Test. 78 (2019), 105692, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. polymertesting.2019.105962. 


Fig. 8. The effect of brush rotation speed on brush contamination (0.05 wt% ceria slurry at pH 4); FE-SEM images for (a) 50 rpm, (b) 100 rpm, (c) 200 rpm, (d)  300  rpm  rotation  speed,  and  (b)  ceria  concentration  in  the  brush  by ICP-OES. 


Fig. 9. The effect of scrubbing time on brush contamination with ceria slurry (0.05 wt% and pH 4); FE-SEM images for (a) 30 s, (b) 1 min, (c) 3 min, and (d) 5 min scrubbing. 


Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 151 (2022) 107043 


7 


S. Sahir et al. 


[21] H.J. Kim, G. Bohra, H. Yang, S.G. Ahn, L. Qin, D. Koli, Study of the cross-

[29] J.A.A. Júnior, J.B. Baldo, The behavior of zeta potential of silica suspensions, New

contamination effect on post-CMP in situ cleaning process, Microelectron. Eng. 136 (2015) 36–41, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2015.03.033. 


[22] H.C. Cho, Y.M. Kim, H.S. Lee, S.B. Joo, H.D. Jeong, The effect of PVA brush

scrubbing on post-CMP cleaning process for damascene Cu interconnection, Solid State Phenom. 145–146 (2009) 367–370. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific. net/SSP.145-146.367. 


[23] J. An, Y. Park, H. Jeong, Structural effect of PVA brush nodule on particle removal

efficiency during brush scrubber cleaning, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. 13 (2012) 451–454, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12541-012-0058-7. 


[24] J. Gulicovski, I. Braˇcko, S.K. Milonji´c, Morphology and the isoelectric point of

nanosized aqueous ceria sols, Mater. Chem. Phys. 148 (2014) 868–873, https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2014.08.063. 


[25] H.J. Kim, Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing, Abrasive Technology:

Characteristics and Applications, 2018, https://doi.org/10.5772/ intechopen.72364. 


[26] X. Gua, T. Nemoto, A. Teramoto, T. Ito, S. Sugawa, T. Ohmi, Reduction of scratch

on brush scrubbing in post-CMP cleaning by analyzing contact kinetics on ultra low-k dielectric, ECS Trans. 19 (7) (2009) 103–109, https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
## 1.3123779.



[27] K.-M. Han, S.-Y. Han, S. Sahir, N.P. Yerriboina, T.-G. Kim, N. Mahadev, J.-G. Park,

Contamination mechanism of ceria particles on the oxide surface after the CMP process, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 9 (2020), 124004, https://doi.org/ 10.1149/2162-8777/abcf13. 


[28] S. Sahir, N.P. Yerriboina, S.-Y. Han, K.-M. Han, T.-G. Kim, N. Mahadev, J.-G. Park,

Investigation of the effect of different cleaning forces on Ce-O-Si bonding during oxide post-CMP cleaning, Appl. Surf. Sci. 545 (2021), 149035, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.apsusc.2021.149035. 


J. Glass Ceram. 4 (2) (2014) 29–37, https://doi.org/10.4236/njgc.2014.42004. 


[30] J. Seo, J.W. Lee, J. Moon, W. Sigmund, U. Paik, Role of the surface chemistry of

ceria surfaces on silicate adsorption, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 6 (2014) 7388–7394, https://doi.org/10.1021/am500816y. 


[31] K. Xu, R. Vos, G. Vereecke, G. Doumen, W. Fyen, P.W. Martens, M.M. Heyns,

C. Vinckier, J. Fransaer, F. Kovacs, Fundamental study of the removal mechanisms of nano-sized particles using brush scrubber cleaning, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 23 (5) (2005) 2160–2175, https://doi.org/10.1116/1.2052713. 


[32] A.A. Busnaina, H. Lin, N. Moumen, J.-W. Feng, J. Taylor, Particle adhesion and

removal mechanisms in post-CMP cleaning processes, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 15 (4) (2002) 374–382, https://doi.org/10.1109/TSM.2002.804872. 
[33] M. Ito, T. Sanada, A. Fukunaga, H. Hiyama, Brush deformation effects on poly vinyl
acetal brush scrubbing, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 7 (4) (2018) P201–P208, https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0191804jss. 


[34] T. Miyakia, T. Sanada, Y. Mizushima, A. Fukunaga, H. Hiyama, Contact area

distribution during PVA brush scrubbing, ECS Trans. 92 (2) (2019) 183–189, https://doi.org/10.1149/09202.0183ecst. 


[35] Y. Sampurno, Y. Zhuang, X. Gu, S. Theng, T. Nemoto, T. Sun, F. Sudargho,

A. Teramoto, A. Philipossian, T. Ohmi, Effect of various cleaning solutions and brush scrubber kinematics on the frictional attributes of post copper CMP cleaning process, Solid State Phenom. 145–146 (2009) 363–366. https://doi.org/10.4 028/www.scientific.net/SSP.145-146.363. 


[36] W. Peng, C. Guan, S. Li, Efficient fabrication of ultrasmooth and defect-free quartz

glass surface by hydrodynamic effect polishing combined with ion beam figuring, Opt Express 22 (11) (2014) 1395–13961, https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.22.013951. 


Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 151 (2022) 107043 


8 

