---
title: "10_1016j_colsurfa_2011_07.039"
---


Colloids  and  Surfaces  A:  Physicochem.  Eng.  Aspects  388 (2011) 21–  28 


Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect 


Colloids   and   Surfaces   A:   Physicochemical   and Engineering   Aspects 


j o  u r  n a l  h o m e p  a  g e :  w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / c o l s u r f a 


Role   of   polycation   adsorption   in   poly-Si,   SiO2 and   Si3N4 removal   during   chemical mechanical   polishing:   Effect   of   polishing   pad   surface   chemistry 


Naresh   K.   Penta,   John   B.   Matovu,   P.R.   Dandu   Veera 1,   Sitaraman   Krishnan,   S.V.   Babu ∗ 


Department  of  Chemical  and  Bio-molecular  Engineering,  and  Center  for  Advanced  Materials  Processing,  Clarkson  University,  Potsdam,  NY  13699,  USA 


a 


r 


t 


i 


c 


l 


e 


i 


n 


f 


o 


a 


b 


s 


t 


r 


a 


c 


t 


Article  history: Received  20  June  2011 Received  in  revised  form  22  July  2011 Accepted  28  July  2011 Available online 5 August 2011 


Keywords: CMP Poly-Si SiO2 Si3N4 PDADMAC Polishing  pads Bridging  attraction Eosin  Y  staining 


## 1.  Introduction

The   dramatic   differences   in   the   effects   of   two   different   polishing   pads   (IC1000   and   Politex)   on   the removal   rates   (RRs)   of   poly-Si,   SiO2,  and   Si3N4 ﬁlms   during   chemical   mechanical   polishing   using   aqueous abrasive-free   solutions   of   a  cationic   polymer,   poly(diallyldimethyl   ammonium   chloride)   (PDADMAC),   are described.  For   example,   with   a  250   ppm   of  aqueous   PDADMAC   solution,   poly-Si   RR   is  <1   nm/min   with a   Politex   pad   but   is   about   500   nm/min   using   an   IC1000   pad.   The   difference   in   the   RRs   is   attributed   to differences   in   the   strengths   of   PDADMAC-mediated   bridging   interactions   between   the   pads   and  the   sub- strates.   Also,   when   the  same   250   ppm   of  PDADMAC   was   used   as  an   additive   in   either   silica-   or   ceria-based dispersions,   the  RRs   of   both   SiO2 and   Si3N4 ﬁlms   were   suppressed   to  less   than   1  nm/min   for  both   pads. Possible   mechanisms   for   the   observed   differences   in   the  RRs   of  poly-Si,   SiO2,  and   Si3N4 on   the   two   pads are   discussed   based   on  elemental   analysis   of   the  pads,   X-ray   photoelectron   spectroscopy,   and   zeta   poten- tial  measurements   (of   the   pads   in   the   absence   and   presence   of  PDADMAC).   Also,   the   results   of  exposure to   eosin   Y,   a   dye   that   changes   color   on  exposure   to  PDADMAC   provided   useful   insights   into   the  strength of   the   bridging   attraction   between   the   pads   and   PDADMAC. 


© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 


Chemical  mechanical  planarization/polishing  (CMP),  a  process widely  used  in  semiconductor  manufacturing  technology,  uti- lizes  several  types  of  polishing  pads  which  differ  in  their  surface morphology,  hardness,  porosity  and  structure.  Some  of  the  more popular  pads  include  Suba,  Politex,  and  the  IC-series  of  pads, stacked  with  and  without  Suba  pads.  Politex  pads  are  made  from microporous  urethane  having  a  surface  morphology  derived  from the  ends  of  columnar  void  structures  in  bulk  urethane  and  are grown  on  a  urethane  felt  base  [1].   IC-series  pads  are  ﬁlled  and/or blown  composite  urethanes  having  surface  structures  made  up  of hemispherical  depressions  derived  from  exposed  hollow  spherical elements  or  incorporated  gas  bubbles  [1].   The  method  of  manufac- turing  provides  these  two  pads  with  different  intrinsic  properties such  as  chemical  composition,  speciﬁc  density,  pore  size,  surface roughness,  and  hardness.  The  traditional  role  of  such  polishing  pads has  been  to  hold,  disperse  and  rejuvenate  the  slurry  in  the  pores, transmit  the  load  to  the  abrasives  and  wafer,  and  assist  with  the planarization  of  the  surface  topography  of  the  substrate  [2].   Sev- eral  studies  [3]  revealed  distinguishable  differences  among  these 


∗ 


Corresponding  author. E-mail  address:  babu@clarkson.edu  (S.V.  Babu). 


1 Currently  working  at  Intel  Corporation,  Portland,  Oregon,  USA. 


0927-7757/$  –  see  front  matter © doi:10.1016/j.colsurfa.2011.07.039 


2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 


pads  during  CMP   in  slurry  transportation,  wafer-pad  contact  area, polish  rates  of  thin  ﬁlms,  degradation  of  the  pad  when  exposed  to certain  chemicals,  and  extent  of  dishing  caused  by  pad  bending. Some  properties  of  the  polishing  pad  can  also  inﬂuence  key  pro- cess  metrics  such  as  pattern  sensitivity  of  the  polish  rates,  local  and global  across-wafer  uniformity,  etc.  [4,5].  Other  studies  have  also focused  on  the  differences  in  pad  glazing,  conditioning  and  soaking in  water,  and  chemical  or  physical  modiﬁcation  of  the  pad  surfaces 
[6,7].



In  view  of  these  differences,  Politex  and  IC1000  pads  have  been used  for  different  applications  in  the  semiconductor  industry.  For example,  Politex  pads  are  widely  used  for  removing  tungsten,  tan- talum,  and  tantalum  nitride  and  for  various  bufﬁng  steps,  while IC1000  pads  are  used  to  produce  high  planarization  efﬁciencies  [8]. These  pads  are  also  used  during  the  polishing  and  planarization of  three  dielectric  ﬁlms  (poly-Si,  SiO2 and  Si3N4)  that  are  important and  challenging  during  the  fabrication  of  recently  developed  Fin Field-effect-transistor  (FinFET)  devices  [9,10],   in  the  replacement metal  gate  (RMG)  technique  for  the  fabrication  of  high-k/metal  gate structures  [11],  in  creating  shallow  trench  isolation  (STI)  structures 
[10],  and  in  the  processing  of  microelectromechanical  systems
(MEMS)  [12].  In  this  paper,  we  extend  our  recent  work  [13]  in  which aqueous  solutions  of  a  cationic  polymer,  poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium  chloride)  (PDADMAC),  were  shown  to  polish  poly-Si at  a  rate  of  about  500  nm/min  at  pH  10  using  an  IC1000  pad.  Here we  show  that  removal  rates  (RRs)  of  poly-Si  ﬁlms  are  signiﬁcantly 


IC1000 


pad 


1% ce 


ria 


tive 


tive 


-No addi No addi -250pp 


Oxide Nitride- Oxide Nitride- 


250pp 


m PDADMAC 


m PDADMAC 


3 


5 


7 


pH 


9 


11 


(a) 


800 


600 


400 


200 


RR (nm/min) 


0 


1 


-No ad  ditive tive -No addi 


-250p 


pm PDADMAC 


-250pp 


m PDADMAC 


Oxide Nitride Oxide Nitride 


Poli 


tex 


pad 


1% ce 


ria 


(b) 


800 


600 


400 


200 


RR (nm/min) 


IC1000 


pad 


1% sili  ca +250 pp  m PDADMAC 1% ceria + 250 pp  m PDADMAC 250 1% ceria 1% sil  ica DI water 


pp  m PDADMAC 


3 


5 


pH 


7 


9 


11 


Politex 


pad 


pp  m PDADMAC pp  m PDADMAC 


1% sili  ca +250 1% ceria+ 250 250 pp  m PDADMAC 1% ceria 1% sil  ica DI water 


3 


5 


7 


pH 


9 


11 


0 


1 


3 


5 


7 


pH 


9 


11 


(a) 


800 


600 


400 


200 


poly-Si RR (nm/min) 


0 


1 


(b) 


800 


600 


400 


200 


poly-Si RR (nm/min) 


0 


1 


Fig.  1.  RRs  of  poly-Si  ﬁlms  on  IC1000  pad  (a)  and  Politex  pad  (b),  respectively,  as a   function  of  pH  using  abrasive-free  solutions  and  ceria/silica  dispersions  with  and without  250  ppm  PDADMAC.  Part  a  is  from  Ref.  [13]. 


Fig.  2.  RRs  of  both  oxide  and  nitride  ﬁlms  on  IC1000  and  Politex  pad,  respectively, as  a  function  of  pH  using  1%  ceria  (dmean ∼ 180  nm)   dispersions  with  and  without 250  ppm  PDADMAC.  Part  a  is  from  Ref.  [13]. 


## 2.  Experimental

## 2.1.  Materials

An  aqueous  dispersion  of  ceria  abrasives  (dmean ∼ 


180  nm, 50  wt%)  was   supplied  by  Ferro  Corp.  The  same  dispersion  was used  in  several  of  our  earlier  publications  [15,16],   and  its  char- acteristics  are  available  there.  Colloidal  silica  abrasives  (NexSil 85A,  dmean ∼ 50  nm),  stabilized  at  pH  3.5,  were  supplied  by Nyacol  Nano  Technologies.  Silicon  nitride  particles,  PDADMAC (MW  ∼  200,000  g/mol),  and  the  pH  adjusting  agents  (KOH  and HNO3)  were  all  obtained  from  Sigma–Aldrich.  Eosin  Y  dye  was  pur- chased  from  Alfa  Aesar.  The  two   types  of  polishing  pads  (IC1000 K-groove  and  Politex)  and  the  diamond  grit  conditioner  used  here were  supplied  by  Dow  Electronic  Materials  and  3M,   respectively. Blanket  poly-Si  ﬁlms  (2000  nm  thick,  low  pressure  chemical  vapor deposited  (LPCVD)  at  about  610 ◦C  on  silicon  wafers)  were  obtained from  DK  Nanotechnology.  Thermal  oxide  (2000  nm  thick,  grown  at 900 ◦C)  and  silicon  nitride  ﬁlms  (500  nm  thick,  LPCVD  at  790 ◦C) grown  on  silicon  substrates  were  obtained  from  Montco-Silicon Technologies,  Inc.  While  the  poly-Si  and  silicon  nitride  ﬁlms  were deposited  on  an  intervening  100  nm  thick  silicon  dioxide  layer grown  on  8  in.  diameter  silicon  wafers,  the  thermal  oxide  was directly  grown  on  the  silicon  substrate.  Each  of  these  8  in.  wafers was  cut  into  several  2  in.  diameter  pieces,  which  were  then  used for  polishing. 


different  when  the  softer  Politex  pads  are  used.  The  RRs  of  poly-Si, SiO2,  and  Si3N4 ﬁlms  obtained  using  aqueous  abrasive-free  solu- tions  and  ceria  and  silica  dispersions,  with  and  without  250  ppm PDADMAC,  were  reported  earlier  but  only  for  an  IC1000  pad  [13], and  are  again  presented  (Figs.  1a,  2a  and  3a)  for  ease  of  comparison with  the  new  data  reported  here. 


The  experiments  described  herein  show  that,  using  250  ppm of  an  abrasive-free  aqueous  solution  of  a  cationic  polymer,  PDAD- MAC   (MW 200,000  g/mol),  the  RRs  of  poly-Si  can  be  suppressed to  <1  nm/min  on  a  Politex  pad  at  all  pH  values  tested  in  the  range of  2–10  (Fig.  1b)  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  RRs  increasing  from ∼500  nm/min  as  the  pH  is  increased  from  2  to ∼200  nm/min  to 10  with  the  IC1000  pad  (Fig.  1a)  [13].  On  adding  either  1  wt%   silica or  ceria  abrasives  to  250  ppm  of  aqueous  PDADMAC  solutions,  the poly-Si  RRs  on  the  Politex  pad  were  enhanced  somewhat,  but  only for  pH  >  4  and  still  considerably  lower  than  those  on  an  IC1000  pad, while  the  RRs  of  both  the  SiO2 and  Si3N4 ﬁlms  were  suppressed to  <1  nm/min  on  both  the  pads.  In  the  following,  these  RRs  are described  in  detail  along  with  the  results  of  several  other  mea- surements  performed  to  explain  them.  In  contrast  to  the  results of  Chen  and  Yen  [14],  who  showed  that  the  hardness  of  the  pads and  the  abrasives  and  the  electrostatic  interactions  affect  the  RRs  of poly(silsesquioxane),  our  analysis  suggests  that  the  strength  of  the bridging  attraction  between  the  pad,  wafer  surface  and  PDADMAC molecules  is  the  dominant  factor  in  determining  the  RRs  reported here. 


∼ 


22 


N.K.  Penta  et  al.  /  Colloids  and  Surfaces  A:  Physicochem.  Eng.  Aspects  388 (2011) 21–  28 


N.K.  Penta  et  al.  /  Colloids  and  Surfaces  A:  Physicochem.  Eng.  Aspects  388 (2011) 21–  28 


23 


compensation  was   carried  out  using  low-energy  electrons  from  an electron  ﬂood  gun.  The  spectra  were  analyzed  using  the  CasaXPS software.  These  experiments  were  performed  at  Cornell  Center  for Materials  Research. 


## 2.2.2.2.  Zeta  potential  measurements.  A  ZetaSpin  1.2  apparatus

(Zetametrix,  Inc.,  USA)  was   used  to  determine  the  zeta  potentials of  both  IC1000  and  Politex  pad  surfaces.  These  measurements  were conducted  in  a  0.001  M  aqueous  solution  of  KCl,  with  and  without the  addition  of  PDADMAC.  The  zeta  potentials  were  calculated  from the  streaming  potentials  measured  in  the  vicinity  of  a  rotating  disk to  which  the  polishing  pad  sample  was   attached.  Ideally,  samples with  a  ﬂat  surface  are  necessary  for  the  conversion  of  streaming potentials  to  zeta  potential  values.  Hence,  a  1  in.  diameter  sample  of the  IC1000  pad  was   obtained  from  the  center  of  the  pad,  where  the surface  texture  was  smooth.  The  surface  of  the  Politex  pad  sample was  smoothed  using  a  sharp  diamond-coated  knife  edge. 


## 2.2.3.  Bulk  compositions  of  pads

FT-IR  spectroscopy  and  elemental  analysis  of  the  solids  col- lected  by  scraping  the  IC1000  and  Politex  pad  surfaces  were performed  at  QTI,  Whitehouse,  NJ.  The  IR  spectra  were  acquired  in the  reﬂectance  mode.  C,  H,  and  N  compositions  were  determined using  a  PerkinElmer  2400  Elemental  Analyzer,  wherein  these  ele- ments  are  converted  to  the  gases,  CO2,  H2O,  and  N2,  respectively, by  combustion  in  pure  oxygen.  Thermal  conductivity  measure- ments  are  then  used  to  obtain  the  molar  amounts  of  these  gases. The  Oxygen  Accessory  Kit  was   used  to  determine  O  in  the  sample, using  pyrolysis  to  convert  O  to  CO  followed  by  thermal  conductivity detection  of  CO.  A  colorimetric  titration  assay  was  used  to  deter- mine  Cl  in  the  samples.  Combustion  of  the  sample  in  an  oxygen combustion  ﬂask  in  the  presence  of  H2O2 resulted  in  the  forma- tion  of  chloride,  which  was   titrated  with  mercuric  nitrate  in  the presence  of  phenylazoformic  acid  2-phenylhydrazide. 


## 3.  Results  and  discussion

## 3.1.  Polishing  results

Poly-Si  RRs:  Fig.  1  shows  the  poly-Si  RRs  obtained  on  an  IC1000 and  a  Politex  pad,  in  the  pH  range  of  2–10  using  pH-adjusted  deion- ized  (DI)  water,  aqueous  solutions  of  250  ppm  of  PDADMAC,  and wt%  ceria/silica  suspensions  with  250  ppm  PDADMAC  and  with- 1 out  PDADMAC.  A  PDADMAC  concentration  of  250  ppm  was  chosen for  all  our  experiments  since  the  RRs  of  poly-Si  obtained  were  high at  this  concentration  [13]. 


The  poly-Si  RRs  are  generally  lower  on  a  Politex  pad  compared  to the  RRs  with  the  IC1000  pad  in  all  these  cases  (Fig.  1b).  More  signif- icantly,  with  the  Politex  pad,  no  poly-Si  RRs  were  observed  using abrasive-free  solutions  of  250  ppm  of  PDADMAC  in  the  pH  range of  2–10.  Adding  either  1  wt%  ceria  or  silica  abrasives  enhanced  the RRs  somewhat,  especially  above  pH  4,  but  they  are  still  much  lower than  those  with  the  IC1000  pad. 


SiO2 and  Si3N4 RRs:  Unlike  the  poly-Si  RRs,  the  oxide  and ∼0  nm/min  when  polished  using nitride  RRs  on  both  the  pads  were pH-adjusted  DI  water  as  well  as  250  ppm  of  aqueous  PDADMAC solutions  in  the  pH  range  of  2–10.  These  data  are  not  shown. 


Fig.  2  shows  the  RRs  of  the  oxide  and  nitride  ﬁlms  using  an IC1000  pad  and  a  Politex  pad  with  1  wt%  ceria  (dmean ∼ 180  nm) dispersions  in  the  presence  and  absence  of  PDADMAC  (250  ppm concentration).  Using  1  wt%   ceria  with  no  PDADMAC  and  with the  IC1000  pad,  the  oxide  RR  is  about  10  nm/min  at  pH  2,  about 180  nm/min  at  pH  3  and  greater  than  400  nm/min  in  the  pH  range of  4–10  while  the  nitride  RR  is  less  than  10  nm/min  below  pH  4 and  about  100  nm/min  in  the  pH  range  of  4–10.  With  the  Politex pad,  the  sharp  increase  in  the  oxide  RRs  (which  was  observed  at 


No addi -No addi 


Nitride- Oxide Nitride-250 


tive 


tive 


Oxide-250 


pp  m PDADMAC pp  m PDADMAC 


IC1000 


pad 


1% 


sili 


ca 


(a) 


60 


40 


20 


RR (nm/min) 


0 


1 


3 


5 


pH 


7 


9 


11 


tive 


tive 


Nitride Oxide- Nitride Oxide 


-No addi No addi -250 -250 


pp  m PDADMAC pp  m PDADMAC 


Poli 


tex 


pad 


1% 


sili 


ca 


3 


5 


7 


pH 


9 


11 


(b) 


60 


40 


20 


RR (nm/min) 


0 


1 


Fig.  3.  RRs  of  both  oxide  and  nitride  ﬁlms  on  IC1000  and  Politex  pad,  respectively, as   a  function  of  pH  using  1%  silica  (dmean ∼ 50  nm)   dispersions  with  and  without 250  ppm  PDADMAC.  Part  a  is  from  Ref.  [13]. 


## 2.2.  Methods

## 2.2.1.  Determination  of  RRs

The  2  in.  diameter  wafers  were  polished  for  one  minute  on a CETR  polisher  at  4  psi  down  pressure,  90/90  rpm  carrier/platen speed,  and  a  slurry  ﬂow  rate  of  120  ml/min.  The  IC1000  pad  (k- groove)  was  conditioned  for  one  minute  using  a  4  in.  diameter diamond-grit  conditioner  after  each  polishing  but  no  conditioning was  performed  for  the  Politex  pad.  A  Filmetrics  interferometer  was used  to  measure  the  thickness  of  the  different  ﬁlms  (oxide,  Si3N4, and  poly-Si)  before  and  after  polishing.  The  RR  of  each  of  these ﬁlms  was  determined  from  the  difference  between  pre-  and  post- polished  ﬁlm  thickness  values.  The  reported  RR  for  each  experiment is  the  arithmetic  average  of  the  RRs  measured  for  two   different wafers,  each  at  16  points  located  across  a  diameter  of  the  wafer. The  standard  deviation  in  RRs  was  based  on  the  data  for  these  32 points. 


## 2.2.2.  Surface  characterization  of  polishing  pads

## 2.2.2.1.  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  (XPS).  Chemical  composi-

tions  of  the  surfaces  of  a  conditioned  IC1000  and  un-conditioned Politex  pads  were  determined  using  XPS.  Survey  scans  and  high  res- olution  C  1s  XPS  were  acquired  using  Surface  Science  Instruments model  SSX-100  spectrometer  (Eastman  Kodak,  Rochester,  NY).  A monochromatic  Al  K(cid:2) X-ray  source  at  1486.6  eV  was   used.  Photo- electrons  were  collected  at  an  angle  of  55◦ from  the  surface  normal and  analyzed  using  a  hemispherical  analyzer  with  a  pass  energy  of 150  eV  for  survey  scans  and  50  eV  for  high  resolution  scans.  Charge 


Table  1 Surface  compositions  of  IC1000  and  Politex  pads  determined  using  XPS. 


IC1000 


Atomic  % 


No.  of  atoms relative  to  C  (%) 


C N O Cl Si 


64.9 
## 6.1
22.0 
## 3.3

## 3.7



100 9 34 5 6 


Politex 


Atomic  % 


75.5 0.8 22.4 0.8 0.5 


No.  of  atoms relative  to  C  (%) 


100 1 30 1 <1 


shown).  The  absorbances  of  these  peaks  were  nearly  the  same  for the  two  pads,  as  expected.  The  peak  at  1101  cm−1 corresponds  to the  C–O  stretch  of  the  polyether  soft  segments  in  the  polyurethane. The  absorbance  of  this  peak  was   higher  in  the  case  of  the  Politex pad,  which  is  consistent  with  the  soft  nature  of  this  pad. 


The  C O  stretching  vibrations  of  the  urethane  groups  (amide  I bands)  were  seen  at  1713  cm−1 in  IC1000  and  1729  cm−1 in  Poli- tex.  The  peaks  at  1521  cm−1 and  1533  cm−1 are  also  attributed  to the  urethane  groups  (amide  II  bands).  The  higher  intensity  of  the amide  II  band  in  IC1000  indicates  the  presence  of  a  large  number of  urethane  groups  in  this  pad  (which  is  again  in  agreement  with the  higher  hardness  of  IC1000). 


## 3.3.  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy

The  surface  compositions  of  the  pads  were  determined  using  X- ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy,  using  an  electron  emission  angle of  55◦.  At  this  angle,  the  XPS  probe  depth  is  estimated  to  be  about 
## 3.5  nm.   The  XPS  survey  scan  for  the  IC1000  pad  is  shown  in  Fig.  4
and  the  compositions  of  different  elements  present  at  the  surfaces of  the  two  pads  are  summarized  in  Table  1.  Atom  compositions were  calculated  using  the  area  of  the  peaks,  Scoﬁeld  photoioniza- tion  cross  section,  and  assuming  0.7th  power  dependence  of  the sampling  depth  on  kinetic  energy  of  photoelectrons. 


The  surface  concentration  of  N  in  IC1000  is  higher  than  that  in Politex,  evidently  from  a  larger  number  of  urethane  (–OC(  O)NH–) and  urea  (–NHC(  O)NH–)  linkages  in  the  IC1000  pad,  which  makes it  harder.  The  surface  concentration  of  Cl  was   also  found  to  be  higher in  the  IC1000  pad  than  in  Politex.  This  Cl  could  be  introduced  into polyurethane  through  the  use  of  chlorinated  polyols  [18]  or  by treating  the  polyurethane  with  NaOCl  solutions  [17].  Other  stud- ies  have  similarly  detected  Cl  in  the  IC1000  pad  using  XPS  and  EDS 
[19–21].  Si  was  detected  at  the  surfaces  of  both  the  pads.  Rams-
dell  et  al.  [19]  have  also  found  the  presence  of  Si  at  the  surface  of IC1000.  The  Si  could  be  from  silica  ﬁllers  intentionally  added  to  the 


O 1s 


C 1s 


N 1s 


Cl 2s 


Cl 2p 


Si 2s 


Si 2p 


600 


400 


200 


0 


Binding energy (eV) 


350 


300 


250 


200 


150 


100 


50 


CPS 


0 800 


Fig.  4.  XPS  survey  scan  of  the  surface  of  the  IC1000  pad. 


pH  between  3  and  4  while  using  the  IC1000  pad)  occurred  at  a  pH between  4  and  5.  In  the  pH  range  5–8,  the  oxide  RRs  on  the  Politex pad  are  very  similar  to  those  on  the  IC1000  pad.  However,  beyond pH  8,  the  oxide  RR  decreased  sharply  for  the  Politex  pad,  while  only a smaller  decrease  was  observed  with  the  IC1000  pad.  The  differ- ences  in  the  nitride  RRs  in  the  pH  range  of  2–10  were  negligible  for the  two  pads  investigated. 


Signiﬁcantly,  the  addition  of  250  ppm  of  PDADMAC  to  the  ceria dispersion  led  to  a  suppression  of  the  oxide  and  nitride  RRs  to  below 1 nm/min  on  both  the  pads  (Fig.  2).  Before  proceeding  further,  we would  like  to  point  out  that  the  enhancement  of  poly-Si  RR  on  the IC1000  pad  using  250  ppm  PDADMAC  in  the  absence  or  presence  of ceria  or  silica,  and  the  simultaneous  suppression  of  both  the  oxide and  nitride  RRs  is  very  useful  in  the  fabrication  of  FinFET  and  MEMS devices.  On  the  other  hand,  the  suppression  of  poly-Si  RRs  on  the Politex  pad  using  aqueous  solutions  of  the  same  polymer  can  be useful  for  the  RMG   CMP   applications  provided  higher  oxide  and/or nitride  RRs  can  be  maintained  with  suitable  additives.  Indeed,  this is  possible  and  will  be  discussed  in  a  separate  publication. 


Fig.  3  compares  the  RRs  of  both  oxide  and  nitride  ﬁlms  on  IC1000 and  Politex  pads  using  1  wt%  silica  (dmean ∼ 50  nm)  dispersions  with and  without  250  ppm  PDADMAC.  Using  1  wt%  silica  with  no  addi- ∼15  nm/min  at  pH  2  and tive  and  IC1000  pad,  the  oxide  RR  is decreased  to  <1  nm/min  as  the  pH  was  increased  above  3.  A  similar oxide  RR  trend  (lower  at  pH  2  and  3)  was  observed  on  the  Politex pad.  In  the  case  of  nitride  ﬁlms,  the  RRs  on  the  IC1000  pad  are  about 40  nm/min  at  pH  2  to  3  and  then  decreased  above  pH  3,  reaching <1  nm/min  for  pH 
## 5.  With  the  Politex  pad  also,  the  same  big  drop
in  the  nitride  RR  occurred,  but  now  beyond  pH  4  and  again  reaching <1  nm/min  for  pH 


## 6.

≥ 


≥ 


Adding  250  ppm  of  PDADMAC  to  1  wt%  silica  dispersions  sup- pressed  both  the  oxide  and  nitride  RRs  to  <1  nm/min  on  both  the pads  over  the  entire  pH  range  just  as  with  ceria  dispersions.  Before proceeding  further,  it  should  be  noted  that  using  the  Politex  pad at  pH  3  or  4,  the  1  wt%  silica  based  slurries  without  any  additive produced  comparatively  high  nitride  RR  (about  50  nm/min)  and very  low  oxide  and  poly-Si  RRs  (both  below  1  nm/min).  Hence,  this pad-slurry  combination  is  potentially  attractive  for  reverse  STI  and RMG   applications  when  high  nitride  and  low  oxide/poly-Si  RRs  are required. 


Chen  and  Yen  [14]  compared  the  relative  performance  of  an IC1400  hard  pad  with  a  Politex  soft  pad  on  the  CMP  of  low-k poly(silsesquioxane)  ﬁlms.  They  found  that  the  hardness  of  the abrasives  and  the  pads  and  the  electrostatic  interaction  between the  abrasive  and  polymer  surface  strongly  affected  the  RRs.  Our  pol- ishing  results  above  suggest  that  the  RRs  of  oxide  and  nitride  ﬁlms on  the  hard  IC1000  pads  and  the  soft  Politex  pads  were  relatively the  same  when  either  ceria  or  silica  abrasives  were  used,  except at  speciﬁc  pH  values.  Hence,  the  hardness  of  the  pads  or  the  abra- sives  alone  cannot  explain  the  difference  in  the  observed  dramatic drop  in  the  poly-Si  RRs.  In  order  to  examine  the  role  of  possible differences  in  the  intermolecular  forces  of  interactions  between the  pad/abrasive/substrate  surfaces,  the  chemical  composition  of the  pads  (particularly  their  surface  compositions)  were  probed  in detail  using  FT-IR  spectroscopy,  elemental  analysis,  and  X-ray  pho- toelectron  spectroscopy  in  these  studies.  The  results  are  described below. 


## 3.2.  Infrared  spectroscopy

Both  pads  showed  a  peak  at  814  cm−1,  corresponding  to  the  C–H deformation  of  the  aromatic  rings  (from  the  hard  segment  of  the polymer).  For  comparison  of  chemical  composition  of  the  two  pads, the  IR  spectra  were  normalized  such  that  the  absorbances  are  the same  for  this  peak.  The  peaks  observed  at  1600  cm−1 correspond to  the  C  C  stretching  vibrations  of  the  aromatic  rings  (spectra  not 


24 


N.K.  Penta  et  al.  /  Colloids  and  Surfaces  A:  Physicochem.  Eng.  Aspects  388 (2011) 21–  28 


N.K.  Penta  et  al.  /  Colloids  and  Surfaces  A:  Physicochem.  Eng.  Aspects  388 (2011) 21–  28 


25 


293 


291 


289 


287 


285 


283 


281 


Binding energy (eV) 


IC100  0 Polit  ex 


(a) 


0.8 


0.7 


0.6 


0.5 


0.4 


0.3 


0.2 


0.1 


0 


Normalized intensity (a.u.) 


289 


287 Binding energy (eV) 


285 


283 


281 


0.8 


0.7 


0.6 


0.5 


0.4 


0.3 


0.2 


0.1 


0 


c) 


Normalized intensity (a.u.)( 


281 


293 


291 


289 


287 Binding energy (eV) 


285 


283 


293 


291 


0.7 


0.6 


0.5 


0.4 


0.3 


0.2 


0.1 


0 


b) 


Normalized intensity (a.u.)( 


Fig.  5.  (a)  The  area  normalized  high  resolution  C  1s  XPS  spectra  of  the  two  pads;  (b)  subpeaks  for  the  IC1000  pad;  and  (c)  subpeaks  for  the  Politex  pad. 


polyurethane  pad  material,  or  due  to  pad  contamination  with  silica abrasives  that  are  ubiquitous  in  a  CMP   laboratory. 


The  surface  composition  of  the  pad  could  be  signiﬁcantly  dif- ferent  from  that  in  the  bulk  because  of  the  tendency  of  the  low surface  energy  non-polar  groups  to  migrate  to  the  surface  and  the high  surface  energy  polar  groups  to  be  buried  below  the  surface. The  extent  of  such  a  surface  reconstruction  is  determined  by  the glass  transition  temperature  and  crystallinity  of  the  polymer,  both of  which  affect  the  mobility  of  the  polymer  segments.  Bulk  compo- sition  (data  not  shown)  of  Cl  was,  in  fact,  higher  in  the  Politex  pad than  in  IC1000  pad  (0.1  vs  0.03  atomic  ratio,  normalized  based  on carbon  atoms).  Migration  of  the  polar  (high  surface  energy)  C–Cl groups  into  the  interior  of  the  pad  is  more  likely  in  the  case  of  the softer  Politex  pad  than  in  the  harder  IC1000  pad.  Hence,  the  surface concentration  of  Cl  is  lower  in  Politex  than  in  IC1000. 


Fig.  5a  shows  the  area  normalized  high  resolution  C  1s  XPS  spec- tra  of  the  two  pads.  The  spectra  were  resolved  into  sub-peaks  using series  of  Gaussian-Lorentzian  curves  and  a  Tougaard  background a (cf.  Fig.  5b  and  c).  The  peak  assignments  and  the  relative  areas (number  fractions  of  carbon  atoms  of  a  particular  type)  in  the  two pads  are  summarized  in  Table  2  below.  The  higher  urethane  content 


Table  2 Peak  assignments  and  the  relative  areas  (number  fractions  of  carbon  atoms  of  a particular  type)  in  the  two  pads. 


Binding  energy  (eV) 


Functional  group 


IC1000 


Politex 


285 286.5 288.3 


289.6 


C–H,  C–C C–O,  C–Cl,  C–N N–C  O  (amide),  O–C  O (ester),  N–C(  O)–N  (urea) O–C(  O)–N  (urethane) 


53.7% 30.1% 
## 9.2%



62.8% 27.6% 
## 6.3%



## 7.0%

## 3.3%

of  IC1000  is  consistent  with  the  hardness  of  this  pad.  The  surface  of IC1000  also  contains  more  of  the  ester  [7],   amide,  and  urea  linkages that  are  prone  to  hydrolysis  [22]. 


## 3.4.  PDADMAC  binding  differences  between  IC1000  pad  and

Politex  pad 


Based  on  XPS  analysis  of  the  surfaces  of  the  pads,  differences in  the  extent  and  strength  of  adsorption  of  PDADMAC  can  be attributed  to  the  presence  of  different  amounts  of  hydrolyzable groups  at  the  surfaces  of  the  two  pads.  Note  that  the  ester  and  amide groups  are  readily  prone  to  hydrolysis  [22–24].   Lu  et  al.  [7]  have  also discussed  the  hydrolysis  of  C(  O)–O–C  in  polyurethane  pads.  The formation  of  carboxylate  ions  due  to  hydrolysis  could  be  a  reason for  the  negative  charges  on  the  pad  surfaces.  Because  the  surface concentrations  of  the  hydrolysable  groups  are  higher  in  the  IC1000 pad  (cf.  Table  2),  the  anion  density  and  the  extent  and  the  strength of  PDADMAC  adsorption  is  expected  to  be  higher  for  IC1000  than Politex. 


## 3.5.  Zeta  potential  data  of  the  pads

Fig.  6  shows  the  zeta  potential  data  of  both  pads  in  the  absence and  presence  of  250  ppm  PDADMAC.  Other  researchers  have  deter- mined  the  zeta  potentials  of  the  IC1000  and  Politex  pads  [25,26], but  the  inﬂuence  of  PDADMAC  polymer  on  the  pad  surface  charge has  not  been  reported.  In  the  absence  of  any  additive,  the  IEP  of IC1000  pad  is  about  3.2  while  that  of  the  Politex  pad  is  higher  (about 
## 4.2).  These  results  are  in  agreement  with  a  recent  study  by  Sides
et  al.  [26]  who   also  measured  the  zeta  potentials  of  both  IC1000 and  Politex  pads  using  ZetaSpin  and  observed  that  the  IEP  of  the  ﬂat Politex  pad  (about  4)  is  higher  than  that  of  the  IC1000  pad  (about  3). 


Fig.  7.  Experiments  to  compare  the  extents  of  PDADMAC  adsorption  on  IC1000  and Politex  pads,  using  formation  of  a  colored  complex  with  eosin  Y  dye. 


when  the  IC1000  pad  was   taken  out,  the  surface  appeared  pink, suggesting  that  PDADMAC  was   indeed  present  on  the  IC1000  pad and  remained  bound  to  it.  With  the  Politex  pad,  it  was   not  possible to  determine  if  there  was  any  effect  on  the  color  of  the  pad  since the  pad  is  dark.  Hence,  it  could  not  be  determined  from  this  simple experiment  if  all  the  PDADMAC  was  released  from  the  Politex  pad. Similar  results  were  obtained  when  the  entire  set  of  experiments was  repeated  at  pH  4. 


Further  experiments  were  conducted  to  conﬁrm  the  higher adsorption  and  stronger  binding  of  PDADMAC  on  IC1000  than  on Politex.  UV–vis  spectra  of  solutions  containing  eosin  Y  (5  ppm)  and different  concentrations  of  the  polymer,  were  acquired  at  a  solution pH  of  10.  In  the  absence  of  the  polymer,  the  dye  exhibits  an  absorp- tion  peak  centered  at  516  nm  (spectrum  a  in  Fig.  8).  Fig.  8  shows the  effect  of  the  concentration  of  added  PDADMAC  on  the  inten- sity  of  this  peak  (spectra  c–e).  The  absorption  peak  shifts  to  about 525  nm,   and  a  shoulder  appears  near  495  nm.   The  new  peak  and  the shoulder  can  both  be  associated  with  the  polymer–dye  complex  as suggested  by  Hong  et  al.  [28]  for  protein–dye  complexes. 


Next,  a  Politex  pad  was   dipped  in  an  aqueous  solution  of  PDAD- MAC   (250  ppm,  pH  10),  and  dried.  This  pad  was   then  immersed in  the  dye  solution  (5  ppm  eosin  Y,  pH  10)  and  removed.  UV–vis spectrum  of  the  dye  solution  showed  that  the  maximum  in  the absorbance  was  at  524  nm,   corresponding  to  polymer–dye  complex 


a 


b c 


d 


e f 


470 


490 


510 


530 


550 


Wavelength (nm) 


0.6 


0.5 


0.4 


0.3 


0.2 


0.1 


Absorbance 


0 


450 


Fig.  8.  UV–vis  spectra  of  a  5-ppm  aqueous  solution  of  eosin  Y  at  pH  10  (a),  and  the solution  of  the  dye  in  the  presence  of  10,  6,  and  4  ppm  concentrations  of  PDADMAC (c,  d,  and  e,  respectively).  Spectra  b  and  f  were  obtained  from  the  dye  solutions  that had   contacted  PDADMAC-coated  IC1000  and  Politex  pads. 


Fig.  6.  Zp  data  of  IC1000  and  Politex  pads  in  the  presence  of  0.001  M  KCl  electrolyte solutions  with  and  without  250  ppm  PDADMAC. 


They  also  noticed  lower  negative  zeta  potentials  on  a  customized ﬂat  Politex  pad  than  those  on  the  original  grooved  pad,  suggest- ing  that  creating  a  ﬂat  surface  is  critical  for  accurate  zeta  potential measurements. 


Upon  the  addition  of  PDADMAC  (250  ppm),  the  pads  became positively  charged  over  the  entire  pH  range  of  the  experiment (2.5–10.5),  evidently  due  to  adsorption  of  the  cationic  polymer  on the  pad  surfaces.  The  zeta  potential  of  the  Politex  pad,  which  was initially  immersed  and  stirred  in  a  PDADMAC  solution  at  pH  10, measured  in  the  presence  of  only  0.001  M  KCl  solution  is  also  pos- itive,  similar  to  that  measured  in  the  presence  of  the  PDADMAC solution.  These  zeta  potential  results  seem  to  indicate  that  the  con- centration  of  adsorbed  PDADMAC  is  higher  on  the  Politex  surface than  on  the  IC1000  surface.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  the higher  zeta  potential  values  for  Politex  +  PDADMAC  could  simply  be an  artifact  of  the  textured  surface  of  the  Politex  pad  (which  is  not accounted  for  when  the  streaming  potential  values  are  converted to  zeta  potentials),  in  spite  of  our  efforts  to  smoothen  it.  Also,  the elemental  composition  and  XPS  data  analysis  discussed  above  sug- gest  that  PDADMAC  is  weakly  bound  to  the  Politex  pad,  conﬁrmed by  the  dye  staining  results  described  below. 


## 3.6.  Qualitative  study  of  polymer  adsorption  on  polishing  pads

Eosin  Y  (2(cid:6),4(cid:6),5(cid:6),7(cid:6)-tetrabromoﬂuorescein)  is  used  extensively for  staining  of  proteins  and  estimating  their  concentrations  [27]. The  carboxylate  group  of  the  dye  binds  to  the  cationic  groups  in amino-acid  residues  such  as  lysine,  arginine,  histidine  and  tryp- tophan  to  form  a  protein–dye  complex  [28].  The  formation  of  the protein–dye  complex  is  easily  and  visually  recognized  by  a  change in  the  color  of  the  solution  from  yellow  to  pink  [27,28]. 


Since  PDADMAC  is  a  positively  charged  cationic  polymer  and consists  of  hydrophobic  sites,  it  can  also  bind  with  eosin  Y.  Indeed, as  shown  in  Fig.  7,  the  yellow  color  of  an  aqueous  solution  of  5  ppm eosin  Y  changed  to  pink  on  adding  only  2  ppm  of  PDADMAC,  indi- cating  the  formation  of  a  polymer–dye  complex.  In  contrast,  when pieces  of  the  two   pads,  Politex  and  IC1000,  were  each  dipped  in  an aqueous  solution  containing  5  ppm  of  the  dye,  there  was   neither  a change  in  the  color  of  the  pad  nor  in  the  UV–vis  absorption  (graphs not  shown)  of  the  dye  solution,  suggesting  that  the  dye  does  not bind  to  either  of  the  pads. 


However,  when  pieces  of  the  two  pads  were  ﬁrst  dipped  in  an aqueous  solution  of  250  ppm  of  PDADMAC  at  pH  10,  dried,  and  then immersed  in  5  ppm  of  eosin  Y  solution,  the  solution  in  which  Poli- tex  pad  was  dipped  turned  pink  suggesting  the  release  of  PDADMAC from  the  pad  into  the  dye  solution.  In  contrast,  the  color  of  the  solu- tion  in  which  IC1000  pad  was  dipped  remained  yellow.  Moreover, 


26 


N.K.  Penta  et  al.  /  Colloids  and  Surfaces  A:  Physicochem.  Eng.  Aspects  388 (2011) 21–  28 


m PDADMAC m PDADMAC tive tive 


politex+250ppp +250pp 


IC1000 -no   addi IC1000 politex-no   addi 4 


3 


5 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 


11 


pH 


160 


120 


80 


40 


0 


-40 


-80 


-120 


-160 


2 


Zeta potential (mV) 


N.K.  Penta  et  al.  /  Colloids  and  Surfaces  A:  Physicochem.  Eng.  Aspects  388 (2011) 21–  28 


27 


(Fig.  8,  spectrum  f).  Hence,  PDADMAC  was  only  weakly  adsorbed on  Politex,  and  was  released  from  the  pad  surface  when  the  pad was  immersed  in  the  solution  of  the  dye. 


When  this  procedure  was  repeated  for  the  IC1000  pad,  the absorbance  maximum  of  the  dye  solution  remained  at  516  nm  (cor- responding  to  the  pure  dye)  (Fig.  8,  spectrum  b),  but  with  a  slight decrease  in  the  peak  height,  suggesting  that  some  of  the  dye  was consumed  in  formation  of  the  polymer–dye  complex  on  the  pad surface. 


These  results  indicate  that  PDADMAC  adsorbs  and  is  strongly bound  to  IC1000  pad,  and  that  it  also  adsorbs  on  the  Politex  pad (also  suggested  by  the  zeta  potential  measurements,  cf.  Fig.  6)  but is  easily  removed  from  it,  indicating  a  much  weaker  binding  than that  in  the  case  of  the  IC1000  pad. 


## 4.  Polishing  mechanisms

## 4.1.  Poly-Si  removal  mechanism  in  the  presence  of  PDADMAC

solutions 


Recently,  using  zeta  potential  measurements,  we   suggested  that PDADMAC  binds  to  the  poly-Si  surface  and  to  the  IC1000  pad, resulting  in  polyelectrolyte  bridging  of  the  two  surfaces  [13].  Based on  the  measured  poly-Si  RRs,  we  hypothesized  that  the  bridg- ing  interaction  is  stronger  than  the  polarized  and  weakened  Si–Si bonds  of  the  poly-Si  surface.  These  weaker  bonds  are  ruptured  dur- ing  polishing,  resulting  in  material  removal  [29].  Earlier,  Salmi  et  al. 
[30]  also  noticed  a  strong  PDADMAC-mediated  bridging  interac-
tion  between  two  cellulosic  surfaces,  characterized  by  the  pull-off forces  determined  using  atomic  force  microscope.  Several  others 
[31]  have  extensively  discussed  the  bridging  attraction  between
two  solid  surfaces  with  different  charge  densities  in  the  presence of  a  polyelectrolyte. 


Zeta  potential  measurements  indicate  that  PDADMAC  adsorbs not  only  on  IC1000,  but  also  on  Politex  (Fig.  6).  However,  the  XPS data  (Table  3)  and  eosin  complexation  experiments  (Fig.  8)  indi- cate  that  PDADMAC  binds  with  Politex  pad  only  weakly,  and  is easily  solubilized  by  just  dipping  in  the  dye  solution.  The  weaker bonds  between  the  polymer  and  the  Politex  pad  are  easily  bro- ken  during  polishing,  which  is  reﬂected  in  the  low  poly-Si  RRs obtained  using  this  pad.  It  will  be  useful  to  measure  directly  the strength  of  the  bridging  forces  between  PDADMAC  molecules,  the two  pads  and  the  oxide,  nitride,  and  poly-Si  surfaces.  However, such  measurements  are  complex  and  lie  outside  the  scope  of  this paper. 


## 4.2.  Effect  of  PDADMAC-ceria  and  PDADMAC-silica  interaction  on

poly-Si  RRs 


Based  on  zeta  potential  and  thermogravimetry,  it  was  suggested earlier  [13]  that  PDADMAC  binds  strongly  with  silica  abrasives but  only  weakly  with  ceria  abrasives.  Since  PDADMAC-mediated bridging  interactions  between  silica  and  IC1000  are  stronger  than those  between  ceria  and  IC1000,  an  addition  of  silica,  but  not  ceria, enhances  poly-Si  RR  [13].  With  the  Politex  pad,  however,  there is  no  enhancement  in  poly-Si  RRs,  regardless  of  whether  silica  or ceria  abrasive  is  used,  because  PDADMAC  adsorbs  only  weakly  on Politex. 


## 4.3.  Oxide  and  nitride  removal  mechanism  in  presence  of

PDADMAC  solutions 


Previously,  we  also  suggested  that  even  though  PDADMAC forms  a  strong  bond  between  the  IC1000  pad  and  oxide  or  nitride surfaces,  the  adhesive  strength  of  the  polymer  on  oxide  and  nitride 


is  weaker  than  the  cohesive  strength  of  the  oxide  and  nitride  sub- strates  [13].  Hence,  during  polishing,  the  polymer–substrate  bond is  broken  easily,  resulting  in  no  material  removal.  Based  on  the RRs,  it  appears  that  the  same  explanation  applies  to  polishing  with Politex  pads  also. 


## 4.4.  Oxide  and  nitride  removal  mechanisms  using  ceria  and  silica

slurries  without  PDADMAC 


From  Fig.  2,  it  is  seen  that  the  oxide  RRs  obtained  using  ceria slurry  at  pH  3  differ  signiﬁcantly  for  the  IC1000  and  Politex  pads. Similarly,  a  large  difference  in  the  RRs  is  observed  at  pH  4.  These pH  values  correspond  to  the  isoelectric  points  of  IC1000  and  Poli- tex,  respectively.  Hence,  when  the  pad  is  changed  from  IC1000  to Politex,  there  is  a  change  from  electrostatic  repulsion  to  attraction between  the  ceria  abrasives  and  the  pad  in  this  pH  interval.  Appar- ently,  this  is  sufﬁcient  to  inﬂuence  the  RRs.  Similarly,  the  observed decreases  in  the  oxide  RR  beyond  the  IEP  of  ceria  (about  8)  for  both the  pads  can  be  due  to  the  shift  in  the  nature  of  the  electrostatic interactions  between  the  ceria  and  the  pads  surfaces,  from  attrac- tive  to  repulsive.  In  the  case  of  nitride  ﬁlms,  the  RRs  obtained  using the  two  pads  are  not  signiﬁcantly  different  throughout  the  experi- mental  pH  range,  presumably  because  the  nitride  hydrolysis  is  the rate  controlling  step  in  the  removal  mechanism  [32,33]. 


Similar  changes  seen  in  the  nitride  RR  at  pH  4  obtained  with silica  slurry  when  the  pad  was  changed  from  IC1000  to  Politex  pad can  also  be  a  result  of  the  change  in  the  electrostatic  interactions among  the  substrate,  silica  and  the  pads. 


## 4.5.  Oxide  and  nitride  removal  mechanisms  using  ceria  and  silica

slurries  with  PDADMAC  (250  ppm  concentration) 


Adding  250  ppm  PDADMAC  to  either  ceria-  or  silica-based  slur- ries,  the  RRs  of  both  oxide  and  nitride  ﬁlms  were  suppressed  on  both the  pads.  As  discussed  earlier  [13],  this  is  a  result  of  the  adsorption of  PDADMAC  on  both  the  oxide  and  nitride  surfaces,  blocking  the contact  between  the  abrasives  and  the  ﬁlms  being  polished,  and resulting  in  the  suppression  of  RRs.  The  pads  apparently  play  no role  here. 


## 5.  Conclusions

We   showed  that,  while  using  aqueous  solutions  of  PDAD- MAC,  the  poly-Si  RRs  drop  dramatically  from  about  500  nm/min to  <1  nm/min  when  the  polishing  pad  was   changed  from  an IC1000  pad  to  a  Politex  pad.  Based  on  elemental  analysis,  EDS   and XPS  data,  we  hypothesized  that  the  PDADMAC-mediated  bridg- ing  interaction  between  the  poly-Si  surface  and  the  Politex  pad is  weaker  than  that  between  poly-Si  and  IC1000.  Using  PDAD- MAC   complex  formation  with  eosin,  and  UV–vis  experiments,  we conﬁrmed  that  PDADMAC  interacts  only  weakly  with  the  Poli- tex  pad,  but  strongly  with  an  IC1000  pad.  In  the  case  of  IC1000 pad,  stronger  polycation-mediated  bridging  interactions  with  the poly-Si  substrate  facilitate  high  RRs  by  rupturing  the  underlying Si–Si  bonds.  In  contrast,  weaker  interaction  between  PDADMAC and  the  Politex  surface  results  in  no  poly-Si  removal  with  this pad. 


On  adding  ceria  or  silica  abrasives  to  a  PDADMAC  solution, the  poly-Si  RRs  using  the  Politex  pad  were  still  very  low  com- pared  to  those  with  the  IC1000  pad.  In  the  presence  of  PDADMAC, the  RRs  of  both  oxide  and  nitride  ﬁlms  were  suppressed  on both  pads,  presumably  due  to  the  stronger  substrate  Si–O  and Si–N  bonds  (in  contrast  to  the  less  strong  Si–Si  bonds  in  the case  of  poly-Si)  when  compared  to  the  strength  of  the  bridging attraction. 


28 


N.K.  Penta  et  al.  /  Colloids  and  Surfaces  A:  Physicochem.  Eng.  Aspects  388 (2011) 21–  28 


Acknowledgements 


The  authors  acknowledge  NYSTAR  and  ARO 


(Account  # W911NF-05-1-0339),  Ferro  Corporation,  Dow  Electronic  Materials, 3M,   and  Chris  Plunkett  for  funding,  supplying  ceria  particles,  pads, conditioners,  and  CETR  maintenance,  respectively.  We   also  thank Professor  Sergiy  Minko’s  research  group  (Clarkson)  and  Jonathan Shu  (CCMR)  for  help  with  the  zeta  potentials  measurements  and XPS  analysis,  respectively. 


# References

[1] L.M.  Cook,  J.V.H.  Roberts,  C.W.  Jenkins,  R.R.  Pillai,  US  Patent  5489233  (1996).;

J.V.H.  Roberts,  US  Patent  5,605,760  (1997).; D.  Halberg,  P.  Renteln,  US  Patent  Appl.  0017729  A1  (2009). 


[2]   R.  Bajaj,  M.  Desai,  R.  Jairath,  M.   Stell,  R.  Tolles,  Mat.  Res.  Soc.  Symp.  Proc.  337

(1994)  637. 


[3] C.  Rogers,  J.  Coppeta,  L.  Racz,  A.  Philipossian,  F.B.  Kaufman,  D.  Bramono,  J.  Elec-

tronic  Mater.  27  (1998)  1082; C.L.  Elmufdi,  G.P.  Muldowney,  J.  Mater.  Res.  Symp.  Proc.  914  (2006)  (Warren- dale,  PA); S.  Armini,  C.M.  Whelan,  M.   Moinpour,  K.  Maex,  J.  Electrochem.  Soc.  156  (2009) H18. 


[4]  P.  Singer,  Semicond.  Int.  2  (1994)  48;

W.   O’Mara,  Semicond.  Int.  7  (1994)  140; D.  Rosales-Yeomans,  D.  DeNardis,  L.  Borucki,  T.  Suzuki,  A.  Philipossian,  J.  Elec- trochem.  Soc.  155  (2008)  H750; D.  Rosales-Yeomans,  D.  DeNardis,  L.  Borucki,  A.  Philipossian,  J.  Electrochem. Soc.  155  (2008)  H797. 


[5] H.  Landis,  P.  Burke,  W.   Cote,  W.   Hill,  C.  Hoffman,  C.  Kaanta,  C.  Koburger,  W.

lange,  M.   Leach,  S.  Luce,  Thin  Solid  Films  220  (1992)  1; Z.  Stavreva,  D.  Zeidler,  M.   Plotner,  K.  Drescher,  Appl.  Surf.  Sci.  108  (1997)  39. 


[6]   T.  Murakami,  M.  Nishio,  M.   Hamanaka,  VMIC  Conf.  Proc.,  June  1996.;

K.   Achuthan,  PhD  Thesis,  Clarkson  University,  Potsdam,  NY,  1998; Y.  Moon,  D.A.  Dornfeld,  Proc.  Am.   Soc.  Precision  Eng.  18  (1998)  591; W.   Li,  D.W.  Shin,  M.   Tomozawa,  S.P.  Murarka,  Thin  Solid  Films  270  (1995)  601; H.-J.  Kim,  H.-Y.  Kim,  H.-D.  Jeong,  MIC   Conference,  2000,  p.  275; I.   Ali,  S.R.  Roy,  G.  Shinn,  Solid  State  Technol.  63  (1994); D.   Rosales-Yeomans,  D.  DeNardis,  L.  Borucki,  A.  Philipossian,  J.  Electrochem. Soc.  155  (2008)  H812; Y.  Sampurno,  L.  Borucki,  Y.  Zhuang,  S.  Misra,  K.  Holland,  D.  Boning,  A.  Philipos- sian,  Thin  Solid  ﬁlms  517  (2009)  1719. 


[7] H.  Lu,  B.  Fookes,  Y.  Obeng,  S.  Machinski,  K.A.  Richardson,  Mater.  Charact.  49

(2002)  35. 


[8]  J.M.  Steigerwald,  S.P.  Murarka,  R.J.  Gutmann,  Chemical–Mechanical  Planariza-

tion  Microelectronic  Materials,  John  Wiley  and  Sons,  New  York,  1997. 


[9] C.  Wang,  J.  Chang,  C.H.  Lin,  A.  Kumar,  A.  Gehring,  J.  Cho,  A.  Majumdar,  A.  Bryant,

Z.   Ren,  K.  Chan,  T.  Kanarsky,  X.  Wang,  O.  Dokumaci,  M.   Guillorn,  M.   Khater,  Q. Yang,  X.  Li,  M.   Naeem,  J.  Holt,  Y.  Moon,  J.  King,  J.  Yates,  Y.  Zhang,  D.  Park,  C. Ouyang,  W.   Haensch,  VLSI  Tech.  Syst.  Appl.  (2009)  127; J.-P.  Colinge,  in:  J.-P.  Colinge  (Ed.),  FinFETs  and  Other  Multi-Gate  Transistors, Springer,  New  York,  2008,  p.  14; A.  Kaneko,  A.  Yagishita,  K.  Yahashi,  T.  Kubota,  M.   Omura,  K.  Matsuo,  I. Mizushima,  K.  Okano,  H.  Kawasaki,  S.  Inaba,  I.  Izumida,  T.  Kanemura,  N.  Aoki,  K. Ishimaru,  H.  Ishiuchi,  K.  Suguro,  K.  Eguchi,  Y.  Tsunashima,  IEDM  Tech.  Digest. (2005)  844. 


[10]  M.   Krishnan,  J.W.  Nalaskowski,  L.M.  Cook,  Chem.  Rev.  110  (2010)  178;

Y.   Li  (Ed.),  Microelectronic  Applications  of  Chemical  Mechanical  Planarization, Wiley-Interscience,  2007,  pp.  345,  664. 


[11]  K.  Mistry,  C.  Allen,  C.  Auth,  B.  Beattie,  D.  Bergstrom,  M.   Bost,  M.   Brazier,  M.F.

Buehler,  A.  Cappellani,  R.  Chau,  C.-H.  Choi,  G.  Ding,  K.  Fischer,  T.  Ghani,  R.  Grover, W.S.  Han,  D.  Hanken,  M.   Hattendorf,  J.  He,  J.  Hicks,  R.  Heussner,  D.  Ingerly,  P.  Jain, R.   James,  L.  Jong,  S.  Joshi,  C.  Kenyon,  K.  Kuhn,  K.  Lee,  H.  Liu,  J.  Maiz,  B.  McIntyre, P.   Moon,  J.  Neirynck,  S.  Pae,  C.  Parker,  D.  Parsons,  C.  Prasad,  L.  Pipes,  M.   Prince, P.   Ranade,  T.  Reynolds,  J.  Sandford,  L.  Shifren,  J.  Sebastian,  J.  Seiple,  D.  Simon, S.   Sivakumar,  P.  Smith,  C.  Thomas,  T.  Troeger,  P.  Vandervoorn,  S.  Williams,  K. Zawadski,  IEEE  International  Electron  Devices  Meeting,  Washington,  D.C.,  2007, p.   247. 


[12]  R.D.  Nasby,  J.J.  Sniegowski,  J.H.  Smith,  S.  Montague,  C.C.  Barron,  W.P.  Eaton,  P.J.

McWhorter,  D.L.  Hetherington,  C.A.  Apblett,  J.G.  Fleming,  Proceedings  of  the Solid-State  Sensor  and  Actuator  Workshop,  SC,  1996,  p.  48; J.J.  Sniegowski,  S.M.  Miller,  G.F.  LaVigne,  M.S.  Rodgers,  P.J.  McWhorter,  Proc. Solid-State  Sensor  and  Actuator  Workshop,  SC,  1996,  p.  178; R.  Howe,  Proc.  Transducers  ‘95  (1995)  43; W.   Tang,  T.-C.  Nguyen,  R.  Howe,  Sens.  Actuators  20  (1989)  25. 
[13] N.K.  Penta,  P.R.  Dandu  Veera,  S.V.  Babu,  Langmuir  27  (2011)  3502.

[14] W.-C.  Chen,  C.-T.  Yen,  J.  Polym.  Res.  6  (1999)  197.

[15]  P.R.  Dandu  Veera,  S.  Peddeti,  S.V.  Babu,  J.  Electrochem.  Soc.  156  (2009)  H936.

[16]  P.R.  Dandu  Veera,  B.C.  Peethala,  S.V.  Babu,  J.  Electrochem.  Soc.  157  (2009)  H869.

[17]  T.  Okada,  European  Pat.  App.  2287227  A1  (2009).

[18]  S.  Khatua,  Y.-L.  Hsieh,  J.  Polym.  Sci.  A:  polym.  Chem.  35  (1997)  3263.

[19]  J.  Ramsdell,  S.  Seal,  K.A.  Richardson,  V.  Desai,  W.G.  Easter,  Proc.  198th  Elec-



trochem.  Soc.  26  (2000)  102. 


[20]  S.  Machinski,  K.  Richardson,  W.   Easter,  Proc.  198th  Electrochem.  Soc.  26  (2000)

84. 


[21]  S.  Seal,  I.  Li,  K.  Richardson,  W.   Easter,  Mat.  Res.  Soc.  Symp.  E  (2000).

[22]  T.M.  Chapman,  J.  Polym.  Sci.  Part  A:  Polym.  Chem.  27  (1989)  1993.

[23] D.W.  Brown,  R.E.  Lowry,  L.E.  Smith,  Macromolecules  13  (1980)  248.

[24]  C.  Hepburn,  Polyurethane  Elastomers,  Applied  Science  Publishers,  London,

1982. 


[25]  I.  Sokolov,  Q.K.  Ong,  H.  Shodiev,  N.  Chechik,  D.  James,  M.  Oliver,  J.  Colloid  Inter-

face  Sci.  300  (2006)  475; A.  Dong,  G.  Hou,  Y.  Wang,  D.  Sun,  J.  Polym.  Sci.  Part  B:  Polym.  Phys.  40  (2002) 972; U.   Mahajan,  M.   Bielmann,  R.K.  Singh,  Electrochem.  Solid  state  Lett  2  (1999)  80. 
[26] P.  Sides,  R.  Rock,  S.  Shekar,  M.   Moinpour,  M.   Buehler,  A.  Tregub,  D.  Hooper,



International  Conf.  on  Planarization/CMP  Technology,  Pheonix,  2010. 


[27]  M.E.  Selsted,  H.W.  Becker,  Anal.  Biochem.  155  (1986)  270;

F.   Lin,  W.   Fan,  G.E.  Wise,  Anal.  Biochem.  196  (1991)  279; A.A.  Waheed,  P.D.  Gupta,  Anal.  Biochem.  233  (1996)  249; M.S.C.  Wang,  J.S.  Pang,  M.E.  Selsted,  Anal.  Biochem.  253  (1997)  225; A.A.  Waheed,  P.D.  Gupta,  J.  Biochem.  Biophys.  Methods  42  (2000)  125; D.   Gao,  Y.  Tian,  F.  Liang,  Y.  Chen,  H.  Zhang,  A.  Yu,  J.  Luminescence  127  (2007) 515. 


[28] H.Y.  Hong,  G.S.  Yoo,  J.K.  Choi,  Anal.  Lett.  32  (1999)  2427.

[29]  P.R.  Veera  Dandu,  B.C.  Peethala,  H.P.  Amanapu,  S.V.  Babu,  J.  Electrochem.  Soc.

# 158  (2011)  H763.

[30] J.  Salmi,  M.  Osterberg,  P.  Stenius,  J.  Laine,  Nord.  Pulp  Pap.  Res.  J.  22  (2007)  249.

[31] E.  Poptosev,  P.M.  Claesson,  Langmuir  18  (2002)  1184;

E.  Poptosev,  P.M.  Claesson,  Langmuir  18  (2002)  2590; R.  Meszaros,  I.  Varga,  T.  Gilanyi,  Langmuir  18  (2002)  6164; R.  Meszaros,  I.  Varga,  T.  Gilanyi,  Langmuir  20  (2004)  5026. 


[32]  Y.Z.  Hu,  R.J.  Gutmann,  T.P.  Chow,  J.  Electrochem.  Soc.  145  (1998)  3919.

[33]  E.  Laarz,  B.V.  Zhmud,  L.  Bergstrom,  J.  Am.  Ceram.  Soc.  83  (2000)  2394.
