---
title: "kim2018"
---


Chapter 10 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing 


Hong Jin Kim 


Additional information is available at the end of the chapter 


http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


© 2018 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing 


Hong Jin Kim 


Additional information is available at the end of the chapter 


# Abstract

Chemical  mechanical  polishing  (CMP)  is  one  of  the  most  essential  processes  in  semi- conductor manufacturing.  Its importance becomes highly underscored at the advanced device toward sub 14 nm scaling. The fundamental mechanism of CMP is to create soften surface layer by chemical reaction and then, mechanical force by abrasive particles remove soften layer. The role of CMP is not only material removal, but also planarization, surface smoothening, uniformity control, defect reduction and more. Moreover, semiconductor yield enhancement is sensitively influenced by CMP processing. Surface scratching, which is generated by CMP in nature, is considered as ‘killer defect’ in semiconductor manufac- turing.  Hence,  to  achieve  proper  CMP  performance  without  surface  scratching,  under- standing and development of abrasive particles are crucially important. In this chapter, CMP fundamentals, applications and challenges associated with abrasive particle technol- ogy including synthesis (up to nanoparticle scale), tribochemical reaction, abrasive surface zeta potential behavior, particle size and its distribution will be discussed. 


Keywords: semiconductor manufacturing, chemical mechanical polishing (CMP), slurry, silica abrasive, ceria abrasive, alumina abrasive, advanced abrasive materials 


## 1. Introduction

Chemical mechanical polishing (CMP) has been used for several decades in semiconductor manufacturing since its development at 1980s [1–5]. The original purpose of CMP is to pla- narize wafer surface both locally and globally, which enable subsequent lithographic pattern- ing with proper depth of focus [1–5]. However, as device shrinkage continues, it has become critical process for device fabrication, and its applications play a pivotal role in semiconductor process since transistor scaling becomes beyond 14 nm [5–9]. The role of CMP and planarized wafer  associated  with  lithography  patterning  is  shown  in  Figure  1  schematically  [1,  4]. 


© 2016 The Author(s). Licensee InTech. This chapter is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 


Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, 


distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 


DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.75408 


Provisional chapter 


184 


Abrasive Technology - Characteristics and Applications 


Surface  topography  hinders  conformal  deposition  of  photoresist,  leading  to  distorted  pat- terning. Furthermore, advantages of employment of CMP in semiconductor manufacturing are [4, 5]: (1) elimination of step coverage burden, (2) defect removal from prior process steps, (3)  surface  smoothening  in  wafer  scale,  and  (4)  enablement  of  metal  gate  formation  at  sub 14  nm  device.  The  fundamental  mechanism  of  CMP  process  is  [1–4]:  (1)  Material  surface becomes  soften  by  chemical  reaction  with  slurry,  (2)  Mechanical  force  by  abrasive  particle in the slurry removes soften layer and step height reduction, (3) Material surface reacts with slurry chemical to make surface soften layer again and repeat (1) – (3). Therefore, chemistry and abrasive particles in the slurry determines CMP performances. This procedure is given in Figure 2. With this process, fast material removal across the wafer with planarization can be  achieved.  From  the  abrasive  perspective,  abrasive-wafer  contact  model  on  removal  rate has been published in many literatures which emphasize abrasive particle size (and size dis- tribution)  and  shape,  and  abrasive  hardness. Although  CMP  application  had  started  from planarization  of  excessed  dielectric  materials,  its  utilization  have  been  widely  accepted  in shallow trench isolation, contact and metal interconnection formation [1–10]. Recently, sub 14 nm semiconductor scaling has developed device integration scheme to 3-dimensional tran- sistor formation such as fin field-effect transistor, therefore device process flow becomes much more complicated than previous device node [6–9, 11, 12]. Hence, application of CMP extends to transistor formation, and importance of CMP process becomes highly underscored. 


Figure 3(a) shows polisher equipment and wafer polishing processing. Polishing head holds wafers by vacuum and it rotates on the polishing pad. Slurry is delivered by slurry arm and polishing pad conditioner refreshes polishing pad surface as each wafer processing, which results  in  global  planarization  and  polishing.  Whereas,  in  microscale  observation,  compli- cated  interaction  among  pad  asperity-slurry  (abrasive  and  chemistry)-wafer  surface  occurs during CMP processing, which is depicted in Figure 3. According to semiconductor process development, CMP process itself has developed its equipment, consumables, polishing func- tions and slurries to improve performance. 


CMP performances are defined by removal rate (throughput), selectivity, planarization (pla- narity),  within  wafer  non-uniformity,  surface  topography  (roughness),  corrosion  and  post CMP defects. The definitions of them are: 


Figure 1. The concept of chemical mechanical polishing (CMP). Non-planarized topography becomes planarized surface by CMP. 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


185 


Figure 2. The schematic mechanism of material removal by CMP. 


Figure 3. The schematic of conventional CMP equipment. 


Removal Rate  (RR)  =  (pre CMP thickness–post CMP thickness)  /  (polishing time) 


Within Wafer Uniformity = Film thickness sigma post CMP / Film mean thickness post CMP 


Selectivity  (A : B)  = RR of A material / RR of B material 


Planarization is commonly measured by step height reduction rate. These performances are closely  related  with  device  yield  and  electrical  performances.  For  example,  CMP-induced microscratch  defect  (Figure  4)  is  detrimental  to  device  yield  [3,  5];  transistor  resistance  is strongly  influenced  by  post  CMP  uniformity,  and  residual  material  blocks  subsequent  pat- terning. CMP performances are determined by multiple CMP process factors; however, CMP slurry is the most influencing parameter. CMP slurry consists of abrasive particles and chemi- cal components such as pH adjuster, dispersant, polymeric additives, oxidizer, and passivation agent, depending on polishing purpose to provide proper surface modification of material. 


As described in Figure 3, direct contact between abrasive particle and wafer surface removes material, thus, properties and characteristics of abrasive particle and their understanding are inevitable to optimize CMP process. Although a lot of different kinds of abrasives have been tried for CMP applications, three abrasives have been employed successfully until recent device manufacturing. They are silica-based abrasive, ceria-based abrasive, and alumina-based abra- sive. However, CMP is indispensable process for future semiconductor fabrication and it needs development of new abrasives for the success of new designed device and matured manufac- turing. Figure 5 shows CMP abrasive market trend in semiconductor industry [14]. Its growth expectation for the next 4 years is about 30% increase from 2016. This chapter introduces abra- sive particles and their applications to CMP process for semiconductor manufacturing. 


186 


Abrasive Technology - Characteristics and Applications 


Figure 4. The examples of CMP-induced microscratch images [13]. 


Figure  5. Slurry  abrasive  market  trend  (Reprinted  from  Ref.  [14]  with  permission  from  author.  Copyright  Linx- consulting). FS is fumed silica, UHPCS is ultra-high purity colloidal silica and CSI is colloidal silica abrasive. 


## 2. Abrasive for dielectric CMP

A dielectric material in semiconductor processing refers to insulating materials and mostly it indicates all kinds of silicon oxide materials [5]. Most dielectric CMP applications focus on transistor formation, which is called as front end of the line (FEOL) process. And dielectric CMP requires either oxide bulk CMP or CMP stop on ‘stopper’ material. For the stop on CMP case, oxide material is removed by CMP and CMP stops when stopper material is exposed. Shallow trench isolation (STI) CMP and interlayer dielectric (ILD) CMP are representative dielectric CMP  applications.  STI  CMP  process  (stop  on  ‘silicon  nitride’)  is  described  in  Figure  6  [3] as  an  example  of  dielectric  CMP.  The  stopper  materials  are  mostly  silicon  nitride  or  poly- silicon in FEOL process. For dielectric CMP purpose, two – three major abrasives are used in the advanced node semiconductor manufacturing. 


## 2.1. Silica-based slurry and silica abrasive

As briefly described in the introduction, CMP mechanism is soft layer removal by abrasive particle. This section introduces silica particle as slurry abrasive. During dielectric CMP pro- cess, silicon oxide surface reacts with OH− from the slurry solution and forms silicon hydrox- ide, Si(OH)4. The hydration reaction is. 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


187 


( SiO  2  ) 


x 


+  2H  2   O    ( SiO  2  ) 


x−1 


+ Si   (OH)   4 


And this soften Si(OH)4 is mechanically removed by silica abrasive [3, 15]. Then silicon oxide surface is exposed and hydration occurs again. This process is repeating until silicon oxide disappears. From Figure 2, soft layer can be considered as Si(OH)4 in this case. The hydration rate is influenced by the concentration of OH− ions in the solution, thus alkaline environment can accelerate surface hydration and make fast material removal by fast reaction [2, 15–16]. Therefore high pH silica-abrasive slurry is favorable to obtain high removal rate. Two common synthesizing methods of silica abrasives are commercially used in the semiconductor industry. One is fumed process and the other is colloidal process [5, 17–19]. The typical abrasive images 


Figure 6. Procedure of shallow trench isolation (STI) CMP. Polishing stop on silicon nitride (Reprinted with permission from Ref. [3]. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). 


188 


Abrasive Technology - Characteristics and Applications 


of silica abrasive by each synthesis methods are shown in Figure 7 [20, 21]. Fumed silica syn- thesis uses flame reaction of chlorosilane at high temperature, which is summarized at. 


SiCl  4   +  2H  2   +  O  2      SiO  2   + 4HCl 


With this method, early development of silica abrasive particle size is larger than 300 Å, but development of filtration and post treatment enables to control the abrasive size below 150 Å. The commercial fumed silica abrasive slurry for dielectric CMP has high abrasive concentra- tion to achieve enough removal rate. However, high abrasive concentration caused scratch defects, easy to agglomerate and clogging problem in slurry delivery system or filter. 


Figure 8 shows example of clogged silica abrasive, which leads to significant defects on the wafer at post CMP. The whitish particles are silica abrasive in the slurry loop system. Therefore recent device manufacturing use high percentage of fumed silica abrasive slurry less and less, and  forecast  expects  less  usage  of  fumed  silica  abrasive  as  shown  in  Figure  5.  Contrary  to fumed method, colloidal abrasive is synthesized by liquid phase growth process via precursor 
[5, 16, 18–25]. Commonly, colloidal silica is made from sodium silicate (Na2SiO3) or sodium
meta-silicate  (NaHSiO3).  By  ion  exchange,  sodium  ion  is  eliminated  and  colloidal  silica  is formed  to  be  used  as  CMP  slurry  abrasive.  Colloidal  silica  abrasive  slurry  has  much  lower removal rate than fumed silica abrasive although it gives much lower scratch defect perfor- mance by its spherical shape and small size. To enhance removal rate of dielectric material by colloidal silica, organic cation is added as removal booster [16]. It changes colloidal silica abra- sive surface charge from negative into positive and coulombic attraction force between abra- sive and dielectric surface, which is negative, accelerates removal rate. As shown in Figure 9(a), surface zeta potential behavior with respect to pH [26] can support this mechanism. Schematic of enhanced removal rate by colloidal silica abrasive is given in the same Figure. pH control is  critical  to  this  case.  Recently,  several  attempts  to  new  synthesis  of  silica  abrasive  to  add 


Figure 7. TEM images of (a) fumed (Reprinted by permission from [20], Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society) and (b) colloidal silica abrasive [21]. 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


189 


Figure 8. The clogged silica abrasive in slurry delivery loop. 


Figure 9. (a) Zeta potential of SiO2, and (b) silica abrasive without surface treatment and with surface treatment with organic cation at acidic region. 


190 


Abrasive Technology - Characteristics and Applications 


more stable particle distribution have been reported [26–29]. For instance, Pan et al. presented silane modified silica abrasive particle preparation to mitigate gelation of colloidal silica due to high chemically active hydroxyl group from silica surface. The siloxane groups in silane and hydroxyl groups in silica surface generate hydrolysis condensation reaction, which results in surface zetapotential change to improve dispersion stability [27]. 


## 2.2. Ceria abrasive for dielectric CMP slurry

Although high removal rate, low cost of ownership and effective planarization are obtained by silica abrasive, selectivity control and low scratch defect requirements bring ceria-based abrasive  to  be  universally  used  in  dielectric  CMP  of  advanced  node  semiconductor  manu- facturing. And recent dielectric CMP uses ceria-based slurry much more than before (refers to Figure 5). The CMP mechanism by ceria-based slurry is different from silica-based slurry. Instead of mechanical removal by silica abrasive, ceria abrasive uses surface interaction with silicon oxide dominantly, which is. 


− Ce − OH + −  SiO   −   − Si − O − Ce +  OH   − 


Strong bonding between Ce and hydrated silicate detach silicon oxide and Si-O-Ce lump is removed from the surface [15, 30]. Ceria CMP process is shown in Figure 10. 


Therefore,  ceria  abrasive  surface  charge  control  is  important  in  determining  CMP  perfor- mance.  The  surface  charge  behavior  can  be  indicated  by  ceria  zeta  potential  property  [31]. As shown in Figure 11(a), isoelectric point (IEP) of ceria is ~pH 8 (at acidic: positive charge, at alkaline: negative charge) and surface potential is opposite to silicon oxide at acidic envi- ronment. Thus, most ceria-abrasive slurry pH is less than 8 to facilitate Si-O-Ce formation. Similar  to  silica  abrasive  synthesis,  two  types  of  ceria-base  abrasive  are  commonly  synthe- sized for CMP applications [5, 31, 32]. They are calcined ceria abrasive and wet (or colloidal) ceria abrasive. Calcined synthesis is based on solid-state oxidation process. Raw ceria mate- rial  is  oxidized  followed  by  mechanical  crushing  to  make  them  small  particles. And  filtra- tion removes large particles. Depending on crushing condition and filtration, calcined ceria abrasive size can be controlled. On the other hand, wet process uses precipitation procedure in  liquid  state.  Seed  ceria  nuclei  in  an  aqueous  cerium  solution  grows  and  forms  ceria  (or cerium hydroxide) particles. Ceria abrasive made by wet process has spherical shape and nar- row particle size distribution compared with calcined process. These synthesis methods and typical ceria abrasive images from each method are shown in Figure 11(b)–(d) schematically 


Figure 10. The schematic mechanism of oxide removal rate by ceria abrasive. 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


191 


Figure 11. (a) Zeta potential curve of conventional ceria abrasive, (b) synthesis of calcined ceria abrasive, (c) synthesis of  colloidal  ceria  abrasive,  (d)  TEM  images  of  calcined  (left)  and  colloidal  (right)  ceria  abrasives  ((a)  &  (d)  reprinted by  permission  from  mater.  &  interfaces,  Jihoon  Seo  et  al.  [35],  Copyright  2014 American  Chemical  Society)  ((b)&(c) Reprinted from Ref. [34] with permission from authors)). 


[31, 33–35]. The overall property comparison between calcined processed ceria abrasive and

colloidal  ceria  abrasive  is  summarized  in  Table  1  [31].  Calcined  ceria  abrasive  slurry  pro- vides steady removal rate. Wet ceria abrasive slurry shows relatively lower removal rate than calcined ceria abrasive, however, the most critical advantage of wet ceria abrasive slurry is scratch defect improvement due to small and regular shape of abrasive particle. Recent study by Seo revealed Ce surface oxidation state had significant influence on the CeO2 interaction to silicate and they investigated the effect of concentration of Ce3+ ions on the affinity to silicate ions and wet ceria particle size effect on the adsorption of silicate [35, 36]. Higher concentra- tion of Ce3+ ions increased adsorption affinity with silicate ions and larger ceria abrasive has 


192 


Abrasive Technology - Characteristics and Applications 


Calcined CeO2 


Colloidal CeO2 


Mean particle size (nm): 150–500 


Mean particle size (nm): 120–170 


Relatively high oxide removal rate 


Relatively low oxide removal rate 


High crystallinity 


Tunable particle size 


Facet shape 


Poor size distribution 


Mass production 


Relatively high scratch 


Spherical shape 


Uniform size distribution 


High cost 


Relatively low scratch 


Table 1. Properties of calcined CeO2 and colloidal CeO2 (Reprinted from Ref. [31] with permission from author). 


higher Ce3+ ions due to higher surface to volume ratio. In addition to calcined and wet process, flux method to synthesize ceria abrasive particle has proposed to overcome limitation of cal- cined or wet process [37]. It uses cerium nitrate hexahydrate (Ce(NO3)3·6H2O) and potassium hydroxide  (KOH)  as  starting  material  and  ethylene  glycol  (C2H6O2)-DI  mixture  as  solvent. Through precipitation, hydrothermal reaction and centrifuging process, narrow size distribu- tion  with  desirable  characteristics  ceria  abrasives  synthesis  are  demonstrated  [37].  Ceria  or ceria-based slurry application in CMP is increasing and advanced slurries with ceria abrasive are emerging in the semiconductor industry. Ultrafine (or nano-sized) ceria abrasive and com- posite abrasive will be introduced in Section 5. 


## 3. Abrasive for tungsten CMP

Tungsten  has  been  used  for  metal  interconnection  and  contact  formation.  Many  candidate metals  have  been  developed  to  replace  tungsten;  however,  tungsten  is  still  standard  metal for sub 14 nm contact formation due to its excellent electromigration and diffusion barrier performance [3, 38]. The CMP mechanism of tungsten was proposed by Kaufmann firstly [39]. A pristine tungsten surface is oxidized by oxidizer at acidic condition and it transforms to tungsten oxide (WOx). The formation of oxide depends on solution and chemistry. Tungsten oxide plays a role as passivation layer to protect subsurface tungsten from dissolution or cor- rosion. And tungsten oxide is easy to be removed by mechanical force of abrasive since its hardness is less than pure tungsten. This process is repeated until CMP stops. Therefore, role of chemistry (in particular oxidizer) is important in tungsten CMP. Among many kinds of oxidizer, ferric nitrate (Fe(NO3)3-) is the most successful one [3, 5]. The schematic description of  tungsten  CMP  mechanism  is  given  in  Figure  12.  The  common  and  commercially  avail- able slurry for tungsten CMP has alumina-base and silica-base abrasives [3, 5]. At sub 14 nm logic  device  fabrication,  tungsten  CMP  is  the  most  important  process  to  enable  transistor formation. It requires superior planarity and extremely accurate uniformity control. For this purpose,  alumina  abrasive  showed  better  planarity  and  selectivity  performance.  Hence  its utilization for bulk tungsten CMP is commonly adopted in advanced device manufacturing. 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


193 


Figure 12. The mechanism of tungsten CMP. 


Alumina abrasive has been synthesized by alum process and calcination [18]. For CMP appli- cation,  alpha-alumina  abrasive  is  commonly  used.  Hardness  of  alumina  abrasive  is  much higher than tungsten and tungsten oxide, therefore it is easy to make scratch defect on the sur- face. Moreover, due to the surface charge difference between alumina and tungsten at acidic region,  attractive  force  retains  alumina  abrasive  on  the  wafer  surface.  Recently,  composite alumina abrasive with polymeric material has been introduced in the industry due to defect concern at advanced node semiconductor [38]. Silica base slurry utilization on tungsten CMP is usually for non-selective CMP purpose (polishing both tungsten  and dielectric material) because its selectivity with oxide is not as high as alumina abrasive slurry. Tungsten CMP is driven by chemical effect more than mechanical abrasion, removal rate strongly depends on  chemical  components  (oxidizer,  surfactant,  and  stabilizer)  and  activation  condition  (for example,  process  temperature)  [39–41].  Therefore  adequate  combinations  among  them  are essential to provide desired CMP performances. Although removal rate is linearly increasing with abrasive concentration in the slurry, loading effect (very low removal rate or non-linear removal rate behavior at the early stage of CMP) is more significant in tungsten CMP than dielectric CMP. Yttrium, ceria, zirconium and composite abrasives have been tried and under development for tungsten CMP applications [3]. 


## 4. Abrasive for copper CMP

Copper is introduced in semiconductor manufacturing for metal interconnection application mid-1990s  and  now  it  is  standard  metal  for  back  end  of  the  line  interconnection  [2–4,  10]. Accordingly, CMP for copper has been highlighted due to its process challenges. Like tung- sten CMP, copper CMP mechanism is based on Kaufman’s model. Chemical reaction from slurry produces oxidized copper and abrasive particle removes oxidized copper. The major components of copper CMP slurry are abrasive, oxidizer, inhibitor, surfactant and chelating agent. The challenges of copper CMP are scratch defects and copper corrosion. Corrosion is 


194 


Abrasive Technology - Characteristics and Applications 


mostly induced by chemical in the slurry and most of scratch defects are driven by abrasive particle.  In  particular,  hardness  of  copper  is  lower  than  most  abrasive  particles.  Therefore, smaller size of abrasive with spherical shape and less abrasive content are favorable to the slurry formulation. The common copper CMP abrasives are alumina and colloidal silica [3, 10]. However, at advanced semiconductor manufacturing, colloidal silica abrasive becomes prevalent  because  it  has  appreciable  polish  rate  of  barrier  material  (tantalum/tantalum nitride). The copper removal rate and CMP performances are sensitively influenced by chem- istries and components in slurry in conjunction with silica abrasive characteristics. Most of copper CMP slurry researches have focused on chemistry perspective instead of abrasives. 


## 5. Advanced abrasives for future CMP applications

One  of  the  most  important  requirements  of  CMP  process  in  semiconductor  application  is scratch defect reduction, which has mentioned in this chapter several times. For abrasive per- spective, smaller size abrasive particle is favorable for scratch defect. Therefore, recent abrasive technology has focused on nano-sized abrasive synthesis with minimized agglomeration. For dielectric  CMP,  nano-sized  cerium  hydroxide  (or  ultrafine  cerium  hydroxide  or  nano-ceria) abrasive slurry has been introduced due to its potential scratch defect reduction [33–34, 42–43]. The synthesis procedure of nano-sized cerium hydroxide abrasive is given in Figure 13. 


Transmission electron microscope image of calcined ceria abrasive and nano-sized abrasive is compared in Figure 14 [44]. Single abrasive size becomes as small as 5 nm. Even agglomer- ated abrasive size is less than 20 nm. Tanaka et al., showed removal rate and selectivity control by changing additives [33–34]. However, CMP mechanism of nano-sized cerium hydroxide abrasive is not clearly understood yet. Han et al. reported polishing pad surface roughness control is critical to maintain removal rate stability with nano-sized cerium hydroxide abra- sive [44]. Kim proposed particle coverage model on the wafer as material removal mechanism with nano-sized cerium hydroxide abrasive [43]. In order to apply nano-sized cerium hydrox- ide  abrasive  for  dielectric  CMP,  role  of  chemistry  to  enhance  removal  rate  with  selectivity control needs to be further explored. 


Composite abrasive has drawn attention to the semiconductor industry recently. Each abra- sive has its own unique properties. Some of them are very attractive and some of them are not  good  for  desired  CMP  performances.  Tries  to  combine  advantages  only  from  different abrasives  have  triggered  ceria-silica  composite  abrasive  development  [45–48].  Researchers have paid attention to ceria-coated silica as next generation CMP slurry abrasive. Zhao et al. 


Figure 13. Synthesis of nano-sized cerium hydroxide abrasive (reprinted from Ref. [33] with permission from authors). 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


195 


Figure  14. TEM  images  of  (a)  calcined  ceria  abrasive  and  (2)  nano-sized  cerium  hydroxide  abrasive  (reprinted  by permission from Ref. [44], Copyright 2013 Springer Nature). 


uses sol–gel method to synthesize ceria-coated silica abrasive [48]. They prepared tetraethy- lorthosilicate  and  ammonia  as  raw  materials,  and  composite  nanoparticles  are  synthesized through precipitation procedure. About 150–200 nm spherical ceria-coated silica abrasives are successfully synthesized. Shell ceria size is 10 nm. Peedikakkandy et al. synthesized mono- dispersed ceria coated silica nanoparticles by micro-emulsion method and chemical precipita- tion process [46]. About~10 nm crystalline ceria over silica with spherical shape and overall particle size <100 nm abrasive is successfully obtained. Zhang et al. synthesized ceria-coated silica abrasive by precipitation process using ammonium cerium nitrate and urea as precipi- tant with poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) as assistant [45]. With optimized synthesis conditions, <200  nm  ceria-coated  silica  abrasive  is  obtained.  In  their  study,  X-ray  diffraction  confirms face centered cubic CeO2 nanoparticle encapsulate core silica. Scanning electron microscope (SEM)  shows  uniformly  distributed  particles  with  spherical  shape.  Transmission  electron microscope (TEM) directly shows evidence of homogenous nucleation of ceria particles and heterogeneous  nucleation  of  silica  particle  with  uniform,  distinctive  and  crystalline  ceria shell. With ceria-coated silica composite abrasive, higher removal rate than pure silica abra- sive  and  comparable  surface roughness is demonstrated on  glass substrate  CMP. Likewise ceria-coated  ceria  abrasive,  Chen  et  al.  reported  composite  abrasive  containing  solid  silica core  with  silica  mesoporous  shell  structure  [29].  The  advantage  of  mesoporous  silica  is  its significant  elastic  recovery  ability  combined  with  ductile  behavior.  Chen  et  al.  synthesized solid silica core via conventional Stöber procedure and shell silica encapsulating the core by means of modified Stöber process. It uses vinyltrimethoxysilane (VTMS) as silica source and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide as structure directing agent. Well defined spherical shape abrasives are successfully achieved and it shows clearly core-shell structure. The thickness of mesoporous silica shell is controlled by VTMS amount during synthesis. With this abrasive, higher removal rate of thermal silicon dioxide film and lower surface roughness are exhibited. Polymeric composite has drawn attention to CMP society due to its potential scratch defect reduction. Chen et al. reported polymer based core-shell abrasive aiming to reduce scratch 


196 


Abrasive Technology - Characteristics and Applications 


defect by CMP. The core abrasive is spherical polystyrene (PS) and ceria is selected as shell abrasive [49]. The mechanism of low scratch and minimize wafer damage is cushion effect of soft polymer core abrasive. In-situ chemical precipitation with mixture of deionized water, PS spheres,  cerium  nitrate  hexahydrate  (Ce(NO3)3·6H2O),  and  hexamethyleneteramine  is  used for this hybrid abrasive synthesis. As shown in Figure 15, it is clearly observed uniformly dis- tributed ceria particles on the PS core, indicating the formation of core/shell structured abra- sive particle. The ceria particle size is about 10 nm and face centered cubic structure which is confirmed by XRD and SAED pattern. Based on CMP test with thermal oxide film, PS/ceria hybrid abrasive slurry demonstrates lower removal rate, fewer scratches, and lower surface roughness are compared with ceria abrasive slurry. 


Nano-sized ceria abrasive is already used in the semiconductor manufacturing. Ceria-silica or silica-silica composite abrasive is still under development stage although several unique synthesizes  are  suggested  and  demonstrate  promising  CMP  data.  Most  of  literatures  with composite abrasive focus on material removal rate and surface quality. However, CMP appli- cation needs more performances. In order to be utilized in the industry, composite abrasives have to avoid agglomeration, need to robust abrasive stability, require optimized chemistry, and more CMP performances such as selectivity and defectivity must be fulfilled. 


New  materials  CMP  has  emerged  along  with  new  device  introduction  and  device  node shrinkage,  from  ultra-soft  materials  such  as  porous  low-k  and  photoresist  to  highly  non- reactive metal such as ruthenium (Ru) [3–5, 50, 51]. Ultra-soft material CMP needs very soft abrasive  or  even  abrasive-free  slurry  development  [5].  Ru  is  little  chemical  reactive  metal with high hardness. And it relies more on mechanical force to remove Ru layer than chemical dissolution. Moreover, RuO4, which can be produced by slurry chemistry, is toxical gas [50, 51]. Therefore Ru CMP has a lot of limitation to achieve enough removal rate by CMP. Cobalt (Co) is the most potential candidate metal for replacing tungsten as contact metal (or replac- ing Ta/TaN as barrier metal) and its CMP slurry abrasive development is upmost challenge for device fabrication [52–54]. Known issues by Co CMP are residual abrasive particle defects and Co corrosion. More difficulties on these materials are not only target material CMP but 


Figure 15. (a) SEM images and (b) TEM images of PS/ceria composite abrasive (Reprinted by permission from Ref. [49], Copyright 2016 Springer Nature). 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


197 


also neighboring materials CMP for proper selectivity. Most of new materials CMP slurry is based on silica abrasive and chemistry optimization has been underscored. However, it still has a lot of opportunities to develop abrasives as well. Carbon based materials (either carbon nanotube or graphene) have drawn intense interests to the semiconductor industry for a long time. For CMP perspective, carbon-based material polishing, which has been rarely reported, is big challenge to abrasive development due to its high hardness. 


## 6. Abrasive control in semiconductor fab

The  role  of  abrasive  in  CMP  application  is  to  obtain  enough  material  removal  rate,  desired selectivity and low defect (residual particle and scratch) performance. In addition to develop advanced abrasive material and synthesis, abrasive size distribution and dispersive ability in the  solution  has  been  developed  to  control  large  particle  count.  Particle  size  distribution  is raw  abrasive  material  nature  resulting  from  synthesis,  however,  slurry  distribution  system and filtration can control large particles and agglomeration from the slurry without CMP per- formance degradation. In high volume semiconductor manufacturing fab, slurry distribution system is considered as infrastructure instead of equipment [18, 55]. It consists of (1) slurry drum, (2) agitation of drum (drum tumbling), (3) slurry blending and dispense, (4) daytank (or  standby  tank)  with  stirrer,  (5)  looping  to  tools.  Figure  16  shows  simplified  distribution system. Slurry is being circulated in the loop until it is used for CMP. Abrasive agglomeration is induced by shear stress, temperature change and chemistry variation if proper filtration is not implemented [56]. The location of filters from slurry distribution system is selected care- fully.  More  filtration  drops  slurry  flow  pressure  quickly  by  filter  itself.  Very  fine  filter  will removes most abrasives, which results in low removal rate. Different slurry needs different type of filter and filtration at different locations; however global loop filtration and point of use (POU) filtration at polishing equipment are quite standard [18, 56, 57]. Global filter size is normally >10 μm, which is bigger than POU filter to avoid flow pressure drop. POU filter size is smaller than 1 μm. Yi Wei et al., showed agglomeration behavior of different slurries. 


Figure  16. Slurry  delivery  facilities  in  semiconductor  manufacturing  fab.  (SD  =  slurry  dispense,  SBD  =  standby distribution). 


198 


Abrasive Technology - Characteristics and Applications 


Colloidal silica abrasive agglomeration is more sensitive to shear stress than ceria abrasive. The most important challenge of filtration is plugging by abrasives. Three plugging mecha- nisms in filtration are well known, which are cake formation, gradual plugging, and complete plugging  [58].  Cake  formation  is  driven  by  particles  build  up  on  the  filter  surface,  gradual plugging is induced by particles building up on the pore, and compete plugging indicates pore blocking by particles. Depending on particle size, deformability, and agglomeration, filtration procedure can be optimized. The most commonly used filter in CMP slurry is ‘graded density depth’ type. It has multi-layers of fibrous media and there is retention gradient along with flow direction. Commonly, large particles are captured first at outer layer and small particles are retained at inner layer. However, more advanced filter and filtration researches are reported recently. Nano-fiber based advanced filter to remove large abrasive as well as avoid agglom- eration is reported. Morby et al., suggested composite/rigid structured filter which consists of thermally  bonded  polyolefin  bi-component  coarse  fiber  matrix  and  microfiber-glass  web  as next generation filter to retain slurry flow pressure and remove large abrasive effectively [59]. In addition to filtration, dispersant in the slurry prevents abrasive from agglomeration. For high abrasive content slurry case, abrasive particles are easy to sediment and agglomerate by particle charge interaction. Along with slurry abrasive development, advanced filter develop- ment and prevention of sediment of abrasive are required in slurry preparation. 


## 7. Conclusion

This  chapter  reviews  abrasives  for  CMP  applications  in  semiconductor  manufacturing.  It includes abrasive types, abrasive synthesis, CMP mechanism and role of abrasives, and oppor- tunities  of  new  abrasive  developments.  Semiconductor  business  increases  explosively  and various semiconductor structures with high performance have been developed according to market requirement. In order to achieve mature semiconductor manufacturing, CMP process development is critical and abrasives in slurry play a pivotal role in determining CMP perfor- mances. The most common abrasive in dielectric CMP is either silica-based or ceria-based one. For metal CMP (tungsten and copper), silica is the most popular abrasive. Advanced synthesis for silica or ceria abrasives, new abrasive materials, and composite abrasives have studied for high performance CMP and new material CMP. Furthermore, the control of slurry abrasive in the looping is emphasized. Advanced filtration is critical to maintain abrasive size distribu- tion.  The  applications  of  CMP  are  mostly  focused  on  semiconductor  industry;  however  its utilization  expands  to  display  industry,  M/NEMs,  automobile  industry  and  biotechnology. The key of each application is noble abrasive development with proper chemistries. 


Author details 


Hong Jin Kim 


Address all correspondence to: hongjin.kim@globalfoundries.com 


Advanced Module Engineering, GLOBALFOUNDRIES, Malta, NY, USA 


Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


199 


# References

[1]  Li Y, edited. Microelectronic Applications of Chemical Mechanical Planarization. USA:

John Wiley & Sons Inc; 2008 


[2]  Steigerwald  JM,  SP  Murarka,  Gutmann  RJ.  Chemical  Mechanical  Planarization  of

Microelectronic Materials. USA: John Wiley & Sons Inc; 1997 


[3]  Krishnan M et al. Chemical Reviews. 2010;110:178-204

[4]  Zantye PB, Kumar A, Sikder AK. Materials Science and Engineering R: Reports. 2004;

45:89-220 


[5]  Babu S. Advances in chemical mechanical planarization (CMP). In: Woodhead Publishing

Series in Electronic and Optical Materials. 2017 


[6]  Tsujimura M. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics. 2016;55:06JA01

[7]  Hoffmann TY. Solid State Technology. 2010;53:20-23

[8]  Feeney P. Solid State Technology. 2010;53(10):14

[9]  Kim  HJ  et  al.  Proceedings  of Advanced  Metallization  Conference:  27th Asian  Session

2017. pp. 92-93 


[10]  Ein-Eli Y, Starosvetsky D. Electrochemica Acta. 2007;52:1825-1838

[11]  Steigerwald JM. Proceedings of IEDM. 2008:37-40

[12]  Chi M-h. Challenges in Manufacturing FinFET at 20nm node and beyond. Technology

Development,  GlobalFoundries;  2014.  http://www.rit.edu/kgcoe/eme/sites/default/files/Min- hwa%20Chi%20-%20abstract_%20Challenges%20in%20Manufacturing%20FinFET.pdf 


[13]  Kim HJ. International Conference on Planarization/CMP Technology. AZ USA: Pheonix;

2010 


[14]  http://www.linx-consulting.com/

[15]  Cook LM. Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids. 1990;120:152-171

[16]  White ML, Jones L, Romine R. The mechanism of low pH silica based oxide slurries. Cabot

Microelectronics  Technical  Paper  (https://www.cabotcmp.com/cmp-research/cmp- technical-papers/) 


[17]  Tutorial,  Planarization  Processes  for  ULSI  Fabrication  to  the  Year  2002  (SEMICON

WEST, July 16, 1997) p. 51 


[18]  Li SH, Miller RO. Chemical Mechanical Polishing in Silicon Processing. USA: Academic

Press; 2000 


[19]  Doering R, Nishi Y. Handbook of Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology. 2nd ed.

USA: CRC Press; 2008 


[20]  Zhant H et al. Journal of the American Chemical Society. 2012;134(38):15790-15804

200 


Abrasive Technology - Characteristics and Applications 


[21]  Gert  Roebben  et  al.  Frontier  in  Chemistry,  Technical  Report,  Oct.  19,  2015  (https://www.

researchgate.net/publication/283302479_Reference_materials_and_representative_test_mate- rials_to_develop_nanoparticle_characterization_methods_The_NanoChOp_project_case) 


[22]  Zhang KL et al. Journal for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. 2009;9(2):1054-1057

[23]  Qin  F,  Liu  W.  Proceedings  of  2015  International  Conference  on  Planarization/CMP

Technology (ICPT). pp. 119-122 


[24]  Kao MJ, Hsu FC, Peng DX. Advances in Materials Science and Engineering. 2014;2014:1-8

[25]  Ming-ShyongTsai. Materials Science and Engineering: B. 15 January 2004;106(1):52-55

[26]  Park K-W et al. Journal of the Korean Physical Society. 2007;51(1):214-223

[27]  Shun G et al. Wear. 2011;273:100-104

[28]  Posthumus W et al. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science. 2004;269:109-116

[29]  Chen A et al. Journal of Alloys and Compounds. 2016;663:60-67

[30]  Hoshino T et al. Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids. 2001;283:129-136

[31]  Seo  J.  Surface  Chemistry  of  Ceria  Nanoparticles  for  CMP Applications.  CAMP’s  22th

International Symposium on CMP; 2017 


[32]  Raghavan S, Keswani M, Jia R. Kona Powder and Particle Journal. 2008;26:94

[33]  Tanaka  T  et  al.  Proceedings  of  2014  International  Conference  on  Planarization/CMP

Technology (ICPT). pp. 22-24 


[34]  Minami H. Polishing Selectivity Control for Scratch Free Nano Size Cerium Hydroxide

Slurry. CAMP’s 19th International Symposium on CMP; 2014 


[35]  Seo J et al. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces. 2014;6:7388-7394

[36]  Seo J et al. Applied Surface Science. 2016;389:311-315

[37]  Myoung-Hwan O et al. Powder Technology. 2011;206:239-245

[38]  Broadbent EK et al. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices. 1988;35:952-956

[39]  Kaufman FB et al. Journal of the Electrochemical Society. 1991;138(11):3460-3464

[40]  Kim HJ et al. ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology. 2014;3(10):P310-P314

[41]  Palla  BJ  et  al.  IEEE/CPMT  International  Electronics  Manufacturing  Technology  Sym-

posium. 1998. 155-163 


[42]  Kim HJ, Qin L, Lee T. TechConnect World Innov. Conf. Washington DC, USA; 2015

[43]  Kim HJ, Lee TH, Ryan A. ECS Transactions. 2016;72(18):27-36

[44]  Han S et al. Electronic Materials Letters. 2013;9(2):155-159

[45]  Zhang Z et al. Applied Surface Science. 2010;257:1750-1755

Abrasive for Chemical Mechanical Polishing http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75408 


201 


[46]  Peedikakkandy L et al. Applied Surface Science. 2015;357:1306-1312

[47]  Chen G et al. Applied Surface Science. 2015;359:664-668

[48]  Zhao X et al. Microelectronic Engineering. 2010;87:1716-1720

[49]  Chen A et al. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics. 2016;27:2919-2925

[50]  Ruthenium  CMP.  Integration  for  Dual-Damascene  Copper  Interconnects.  Cabot  Microelec-

tronics Technical Paper (https://www.cabotcmp.com/cmp-research/cmp-technical-papers/) 


[51]  Cheng  J  et  al.  Proceedings  of  2016  International  Conference  on  Planarization/CMP

Technology (ICPT). pp. 195-198 


[52]  Alety SR et al. ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology. 2017;6(9):P671-P680

[53]  Changhong W et al. ECS Transactions. 2017;77(5):93-97

[54]  Turk MC et al. ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology. 2016;5(2):P88-P99

[55]  Mason M. CMP metrics improved by undiluted slurry data. Solid State Technology (http://

electroiq.com/blog/2011/06/cmp-metrics-improved-by-undiluted-cmp-slurry-data/) 


[56]  Lu  Y  et  al.  Proc.  of  2014  International  Conference  on  Planarization/CMP  Technology

(ICPT). pp. 291-295 


[57]  Wu  M  et  al.  Proceedings  of  2017  International  Conference  on  Planarization/CMP

Technology (ICPT), pp. 323-328 


[58]  Yang  HJ,  et  al.  Semiconductor  Technology  International  Conference  (CSTIC),  2015.

China: 2158-2297 


[59]  Morby  J,  Entezarian  M,  Gieger  B.  Proceedings  of  2015  International  Conference  on

Planarization/CMP Technology (ICPT). pp. 128-131 

